This is Jockelpodcast number 334 with echo Charles and me, Jockelwillink. Good evening, echo. Good evening.
We were sitting by a fixed section of reprod, a logging term for young timber. When I heard the high pitched bugle of a male elk.
The 15-foot tall trees shifted like the parting of the seas and a massive bull stepped out onto the logging road.
I was leaning on my knees, trying to look invisible as the black horned six by seven bull bore holes through me with his eyes.
He was in bull range and when I decided that I should try to kill him, the thing I'd been practicing to do for months,
I realized that it felt like my arms were asleep and my heart was beating out of my chest.
I don't know if I can even pull this bull back, the bull stood there only 40 yards away from me.
There was no question I should be able to kill him. I'd shot thousands of arrows at this distance all summer.
I pulled back the bowstring and released.
The arrow missed the bull. Shop behind his butt. That meant I was about seven feet off my mark, which was ridiculous.
This was what I'd called, Shitting the Bed. My first bowshot of my life at an animal couldn't have been much worse.
I didn't get another opportunity that day, but something was ignited inside me.
I'd never had any real ambitions or goals for myself, but something changed.
Now all I knew was I wanted to kill a bull. So right after that first day hunting debacle, I became obsessed and hunted for the next 18 days straight, determined to succeed.
That's right, 18 days straight.
Finally on September 13th, 1989, I killed my first bull.
The first animal that ever died from one of my arrows was a small, young, spike bull.
Granite, it wasn't anything like the giant six by seven. I blew it on, but it didn't matter.
It was my first bow kill and my first bull elk.
Truth is, I didn't deserve a big bull yet. I hadn't paid my bow hunting dues.
And size aside, I didn't know many guys who had even killed a bull with their bow.
So my spike bull accomplishment still felt special.
It was almost a three week grind, but it was worth it.
Some people live their whole lives and never finding their true passion.
I was 20 years old when I first tasted bow hunting success and that marked the time I discovered my purpose.
Suddenly, I had something in my life to focus my energy on.
I quit college and quit about everything else just to be able to bow hump more.
I'll never forget where this journey began and how long it's taken to hammer away at a dream.
We all have to start somewhere.
Nobody is born great at bow hunting.
The average success rate on hunting a bull elk with a bow is about 10%.
So that's one kill every 10 years or one guy out of ten who is going to have success.
That's never going to be good enough for me. Never was, never will be average sucks.
Nowadays, I earn success on virtually every hunt in every state every year.
So I expect to be 100% when the average is 10%.
That said, I didn't wake up one morning, great at bow hunting.
I've worked for more than 30 years to get where I am today.
It's not talent. It's drive.
It's not raw ability.
It's endurance.
Hunting is my passion and being successful at it is what fuels me every day to get better than the day before.
And that right there is an excerpt from a book which is called Endur,
how to work hard outlast and keep hammering.
And if you haven't figured it out yet, this is a book written by an individual named Cameron Haynes.
Cameron Haynes is one of the most highly respected and successful bow hunters in the world.
In order to get there in order to get to that level of expertise and ability,
he has lived a relentless life of utmost discipline
and unmitigated focus.
And I guess since he's got this book, he's written some other books that he's an author
and I guess since he trains hard, he's an endurance athlete and I know that he represents brands
and I know that he's founded and runs businesses
but first and foremost, he's a bow hunter, one of the best in the world.
And we are lucky enough to have him here with us tonight to share some of his experiences
and some of his lessons learned along the way and how they apply not only to bow hunting, but to life.
Cam, thanks for joining us, man.
It's an honor to be here. Thank you guys.
That's a...
That first one, huh? That first shot was a...
The first shot you took was a miss.
Do you know what you did wrong?
Yeah, I mean, I just was wrapped up in the moment, adrenaline was going crazy.
How it gets course in three or veins, it's kind of a new experience
and so intense with that bow coming in and the reprod spreading like I said,
I could see the tree shaking as it came down, I'm just like,
holy shit, what is going on? And then now, and I've been watching the bull because I was up there
the night before on Friday night, Saturday morning that season opened.
So I've been watching from about, I don't know, my own half a liter of myel.
So I knew the bull and I knew what the focus was and it was a big bull and I knew all that from afar,
but once he gets in the showtime,
I think I just hammered that trigger of my release and probably peaked,
and I shot and just missed.
It was brutal, it's rough.
Well, we'll get to some of the more of those experiences and I'm sure you'll...
I'm sure I'll share some of my very limited experiences, but definitely can get kind of crazy out there.
That's why we love it that it can city.
Yeah, no, yeah, what we'll get to those kind of things is,
I think the term that you use with me is it can be heartbreaking.
And I was kind of surprised, the first time I went hunting, I thought that no one told me that it was like a 10% success.
I kind of thought like, hey, you just go out there and when you're used to shooting with a rifle,
like, hey, you shoot it something, first of all you can shoot a lot further away.
Second of all, when you shoot it, it's easier to hit it where you want to hit it,
and it has so much force and a bullet that it's going to cause some massive damage and, you know, shit dies.
Yeah, it's not so easy with a bow and arrow.
No, more variables, and then it kills by him, right?
So, hold a different thing, shock, muscle bone, get broke apart with the gun, with the archery, it's him, right?
So it's where you hit that animal.
Well, let's, let's, before we jump into where you're at now, let's go back a little bit to the beginning and where you came from and where you grew up.
Going to the book, this book,
uh, freaking awesome, it order it, order it right now. We're going to cover a little bit about it today. So many stories in there. So much detail.
It's just an awesome read.
So let's go to the book a little bit and talk about where you came from.
You say here, the biggest legend around Eugene, or Oregon, when I was a kid, I'll wait, what's it, what's the stress on Oregon?
How are you supposed to say it or again? How do, how do, how are you supposed to not say it or a gun?
There you go. I'm, I'm David close to that one.
Or again, all right, the biggest legend around Eugene, Oregon, when I was a kid, was long distance Olympic runner, Steve Prefontein.
But for me, it was my dad.
Bob Haynes was Superman in my eyes.
In a town known as Tracktown, USA, my dad excelled at the sport.
He earned a full ride scholarship at the University of Oregon in gymnastics and after flunking out there,
earned a full ride at Oregon State for Track, where they wanted him to pull, pull, pull and hide jump.
That's, that's a freaking athlete.
If you're gymnastics and track, yeah, he was, he was a beast.
And he just grew up. That's always did track.
You know, Junior Nationals, I had this scrapbook. So I'd like always just look at a scrapbook and headlines and all these things and just a,
just a, great, great athlete.
Beast.
You say, he and my mom fast forward a little bit. He and my mom, Linda Brown, met at South Eugene.
I never forgot something she told me when I was five years old.
Your dad legs are so muscular. There's hard as this wood table.
She said, she pointed out our, oh, coffee table.
Little comments like that made him seem larger than life.
We covered a book on this podcast. It's called Wooden Leg.
And it was about, it was about an Indian.
And his name was Wooden Leg and the reason they called him that was because he could just like go and just keep going.
Yeah.
So got them genetics.
Yeah, I guess so.
Yeah.
Going a little bit more forward again on May 30th, 1975, Steve Prefontane died in an automobile accident earlier that evening.
Steven won a 5,000 meter run at University of Oregon's Hayward Field. He was only 24 years old.
The place where he crashed on the winding narrow skyline Boulevard is now known as pre-es Rock.
Four years earlier, another car accident happened only 10 minutes from pre-es Rock.
Nobody got killed, but it might have helped tear a family apart.
It's one of my earliest memories of my parents when they were still married.
In fact, it's one of my only memories. I was four years old and I woke up hearing my mother yelling.
I went to find her standing by the door, heading into the garage, talking loudly and frantically to my dad.
When I stepped to her side and followed her eyes, I noticed the side of my dad's car was damaged as if he had just hit another vehicle.
I didn't know this at the time, but my dad was now Catholic.
Thankfully, Bob Haynes was able to walk away from this accident, not long after that, my parents divorced.
That's what was going on when you were...
That's like your earliest memories are really, you say, your only memories of your parents being married.
Then they were divorced, not to go back and forth, but them together.
That's about it.
One other night, my dad, he once college was over, he'd play softball.
He came home one night and I remember he was a slid in the base and he had a bunch of blood running down his knee.
I remember sitting there and watching TV and looking at that.
So those two, that's about it.
That night after his softball game with blood, and then when he was drunk and hit a car.
You go through in the book, you know, you talk about the, you know, your mom, she's...
Well, I mean, she's got a kind of carry on with her life, right?
I mean, she starts dating other guys.
Eventually, she gets married to who ends up being your stepdad.
How old were you and that happened?
I think five.
And what did he do for work?
He drove roller for the paving company.
It sounds like he was a bit of a booser, too.
Yeah, yep, definitely.
Definitely had drinking issues and then, you know, he wasn't my dad, so I hated him.
I don't think he liked me.
Definitely didn't seem like it.
So, yeah, it's, you know, whatever it happens.
That's just the way it seems to go, doesn't it?
Sometimes with the stepdad's.
Yeah, but it's a tough job for them.
They're coming in.
They're, the woman better be pretty hot.
If they're going to have to deal with you.
That's all I know.
And there's two of you.
Is there two of you?
Yeah, yeah.
So it's you and your brother, right?
Yeah, well, young brother.
He's a couple years younger.
So yeah, it's, my mom came with some baggage.
Yeah, instant, we used to say in the SEAL teams, like when a guy would meet up with some girl
or start like seriously dating a girl,
and maybe even get married to a girl that had a couple of like instant family.
Yeah, you know, you don't get any like a normal normal, you get married.
You have like the honeymoon period or whatever.
Two, three years just you and this girl, but no, you got instant family.
I know.
What are you doing on Saturday?
You're freaking doing yard work and like there's no honeymoon period.
I know, I know, it's rough.
Roll and straight into it.
Yeah.
And then you got young cam who hates you.
And you know, I have since my dad wasn't around, I just had this vision of my dad and from what I heard
and the scrapbooks.
And so then this guy who comes in with who the fuck are you?
What have you done?
Drive roller.
You know, so it's a tough hand.
It's like, it's no win for sure for him.
You got some crazy stories in here.
I had to pull this one out though.
I had this, this would kind of struck me because it seems like this kind of shit happens to everyone in some way, shape, or form.
You got this going on when I was in third and fourth grades.
My mom worked with and became friends with this lady at the phone company.
I remember her being very pretty and nice.
They went out on weekends leaving Pete and me with the woman's teenage sons to babysit.
My step dad had a heartily and so did the husband of my mom's friend.
So they would go out on road trips or maybe just out for the night while it was a long time ago.
I don't remember all the details.
There are a few things I do remember that might always haunt me.
The teenage brothers weren't the greatest babysitters.
They used drugs and made me and my brother fight in front of their friends.
They'd yell and scream and treat it like entertainment, coaching us and how to hit each other hard.
Whenever there was blood, the boys yelled louder and got even more fired up.
Pete and I didn't like it, but I don't remember having a choice or maybe it was the way for us young boys to try and earn approval from the older boys.
The brothers watched us at our house as we had a pool table and they got and then they and their friends had something to do as they acted crazy and got drunk and high during those stressful nights.
They made me smoke pots so I couldn't tell on them.
How old were you?
Third grade.
Damn.
We do whatever they said so I smoke pot and then they put shaving cream in my mouth as they said it mask the scent of pot.
The younger brother did most of the communicating with us and said if we told on them they would tell my mom that I smoke pot too.
If I hadn't already learned that life wasn't always going to be fun and loving, I did then.
My young eyes were open to the fact that there were people in this world that you could never trust and that would hurt you for entertainment.
That's freaking crazy.
And you go on to say that the one brother, one of these two brothers ended up dead of a heroin no overdose and the other one tripped out on some kind of drugs and killed one of his friends.
Yeah, he took mushrooms that not long after. I mean during that whole time and thought as friend was the devil I think is what it was and ended up killing him.
It's when he's 15.
Damn.
So this is a rough scenario you're left now.
How often are you getting to go to your dad's?
My dad was, you know, he's having issues of his own with drink and you know he'd have girlfriends and I think you worked at a, he was a bartender at the black forest as a tavern there off a lamb at Eugene and so yeah he's.
You know he's young too.
You know, you're 20 some years old. You don't want to have to take care of some kid.
So it's pretty much mostly most of the times at this point is spent with your mom.
Yeah.
You go through more stuff about that. I'm going to fast forward a little bit to middle school.
Middle school you're trying to try to make things happen even to middle school. You got a paper route. You're doing strawberry pick.
Yeah. You got you got you put this quote in here. You said during this period of my life with all the time to be in my own head and that's when you're out taking strawberries or you're out delivering papers.
One constant thought came to my mind.
This sucks.
That's pretty heavy for a freaking middle school kid.
Yeah. I remember because at that time the local paper is every day. So I'd have to get up a four and you know Oregon, especially lamb of valley there. I mean it rains a lot, especially in the winter.
Dark as shit.
For in the morning I'm out there loaded up my little canvas bag. He put papers on the front and back.
It's kind of strong over your shoulders and then I just ride my bike to the houses in deliver.
I'd have to get that all loaded up at the paper box. He'd come and drop papers off like it two in the morning. I'd go out there or four and get all that and just pouring down rain and I'm just like
It sucked. I mean it was it you know I know lots of people have paper routes, but yeah, I'd given everything else. Then at that time I had moved in with my dad because I hated my stepdad so much.
So I was and I didn't miss anybody but my brother basically we'd kind of been in it together. And so I'd live with my dad my my step or I mean my brother would stay with my mom because he didn't really know my dad that well because he's so young.
And and yeah, so it was like given everything else and then that's situation. Yeah, I feel like a lot.
Fast forward a little bit more. You say, since my dad was some legendary track guy, I decided to attempt to follow in his footsteps.
During one particular track meet, I was excited to see my step mom candy coming watch me knowing that she was going to tell my dad how I did. He wasn't there himself, but his spirit loomed large like it always did.
It was really hard to get his attention in athletics since he was gone traveling around with junior national teams.
You couldn't do regular shit and be celebrated. I knew I had to make my marks or I decided I would do it in the 800 meter race at that meet.
When the gun went off, I took off as if it was a 200 meter dash.
I ran like Steve Prefontein going out as hard going out hard and refusing to let go of the lead for sure while a very short while I raised at the front.
But by the end of the first lap, I was dying.
I still remember the guy who won the race Greg Suter. He was a natural track guy who won all the time. He looked like a runner tall and lean.
I was the short, leg-and-kid gasping at the end of the race and finishing last.
I was thankful my dad hadn't accompanied my step mom to the meet. This was my normal. I just didn't have it.
That's what I drew up with.
Life has always been agrined.
Coming out of the gate hard.
800 meters, I heard somebody talking about 800 meters.
There were saying, there's people that run everything from a 5K to a marathon.
That's all what's the word, sort of fun stuff that people do.
But there's no one that goes out.
Hey, we're running an 800 this week because it sucks so horribly.
It's the half mile basically a sprint.
It's tough. Especially when you're not, you know, I just, it was just a kid.
Middle school kid wasn't born to do it.
So is this like six seventh grade? What grade is this?
I think that was probably, I'd say, seventh or eighth.
Yeah.
And you got your ass beat.
I didn't, did you feel like, you know, I mean, this is the kind of thing.
That's a kind of thing that said kids like just often the other direction.
Did you feel any of that? Did you just to keep doing track?
No, because then then my dad moved to Portland so I moved up there, which is a much bigger city than Eugene.
And then I didn't even get a chance to compete with anything.
Because if I wasn't good at a smaller school, I'm not getting anything.
So I remember up there, you were a small fish and a small pond.
When you got to the big pond, you were like a meno.
Oh my god, it was not even. I was, I might as well.
I didn't exist as far as the school goes.
I mean, it's just like nobody knew me.
I never made one friend.
I mean, it was, I remember it.
I remember it's laughing.
I know.
No, my asshole.
Maybe a little bit.
It's, it's just, I'd be laughing too.
It's like, I remember I had zits all in my chin.
You know, I'm like, God, so I did mull on.
I took out my dad lived in a pretty good area.
He opened this record store in downtown Portland, like collectible records.
That's what he loved to do.
And so I would be out in Beaverton, which is out of Portland.
And I would go in mull yards and get get some money that way.
Nobody's given me money.
And yeah, I mean, my brother would come up.
I remember what time he came up to visit and he didn't like going up there.
But we played one on one football.
I was better than him because I was two years older.
So it was like that was my, that was glory to me.
That was glory.
Like reliving the one on one football match with your little brother.
You do end up doing your first hunt with your stepdad.
What was that all about?
That was, you know, he grew up in a real small town in eastern Oregon, Echo Oregon.
And so they would do this big deer camp.
So it's a tradition every year that have a deer camp where they'd have a wood stove and a big, you know,
like a outfitters tent.
They'd play cards and drink and, you know, that was, that was rifle deer hunting.
So like I say in the book, you know, I got ahead into my stepdad for even taking us over there because I guarantee his brothers,
which were just they're all bad asses pretty intimidating like ranch guys, you know, big,
they had a big ranch outside of Echo Oregon.
And then we got these kids, you know, Greg steps on.
They're probably like, what is this?
You know, guys, they don't want kids around, right?
And so I did, meaning my brother were out.
And I saw these deer coming up the hill.
And I thought I saw a spike horn on one of them, which made it legal.
So it was because it was a buck, had to be a buck.
And I shot it. My brother said, you shot it, though.
And I'm like, no, I didn't, I didn't know for sure.
I was like pretty sure, but I was 100% sure.
After he said that, I was like, oh my God.
So, you know, what's the biggest stroke you could do?
Shoot so many illegal animals, right?
So anyway, it turns out it was legal and I got it.
That was my first deer and I was 15.
And did you get like the rush?
Did you enjoy that?
I don't remember that part.
I just remember maybe I finally did something good.
Like, like, get approval from the man.
So.
Now despite everything and I like I said, I skip them through a bunch of the book.
There's more detail in here.
But you eventually say this, it's easy to use your childhood as a crutch.
Instead of seeing it as a chisel, there are a lot of divorces out there.
So that means a lot of kids come from broken homes.
I always hear people say, my family is so dysfunctional.
Using it as an excuse or something.
I really have valid excuse because everybody's family is dysfunctional in some way.
There are so many crutches people want to use to justify themselves.
But for me, you have to eliminate every single one of them.
Get rid of them all.
Then tell yourself, it's up to you.
What are you going to do now that you let go of all those crutches?
I could blame alcoholism on a shitty childhood, but I don't.
Blaming others isn't an easy way out.
Solid advice.
You got to take ownership of what's going on in your world.
Stream ownership.
That's a good call.
It's a good idea.
You know, I was just talking to some people this past past week.
And I was saying, isn't it crazy?
I said, I wrote this book.
And what we wrote about in this book is, hey, you should take responsibility for your actions.
That's the main underlying premise.
It isn't it shocking that people almost treat that like a novel idea.
But wait, let me jot this down.
And the thing that I was also explaining this group of people is that it's really heavy.
When you start to look at your, you know, you look at your life, you look at your health, you look at your business, you look at your family, you look at your relationships.
And you look at all those things that are messed up in all those areas.
And when you say all those things, all those problems in my business, my life, my health, all those things are my fault.
That's really a heavy weight to bear.
But it's also extremely liberating because if it's all your fault, you're the one that can fix it.
You're the one that can get your business back, you can repair the relationships, you can get yourself healthy.
You can take control of all those things.
And that's the exact same thing you're saying here, when you're just blaming your childhood, your parents or your alcohol, the alcohol, all these other things.
Then you just become a victim to those things and that's not what can you change.
You're just a victim.
It's happening to you and you need to go make things happen yourself, not let them happen to you.
Definitely one of the underlying themes in this book you put out.
Fast forward a little bit to high school, which you start to get into as a freshman entering a new high school.
I had no confidence in zero success to point to or build momentum off of life got worse after I decided to live with my dad when he moved to Portland.
Suddenly I found myself in this big school, I didn't want to attend where I didn't know anybody.
I struggled in my classes, I earn mostly d's as a freshman, I ate like shit and wasn't active, so I started gaining weight and to make matters worse, act me became an issue.
Basically, your teenager too and it's just going to happen.
But there was some studs, I'd see the studs and they didn't see my heads.
And they didn't seem overweight or looking down at the floor as they walked by everybody.
So, wasn't everybody.
That's a rough one.
You said this though, fast forward a little bit, soon I realized things had to change.
That the situation in Portland was dire, feeling alone and isolated caused me not to give any effort to school or make friends, my grades were all d's.
I was overweight and insecure, so I moved back with my mom for my sophomore junior and senior years.
I knew it hurt my dad, but I was miserable and felt desperate.
I then attended Mohawk High School and what is it, Marcola?
Yep, in Marcola. It was a small school and a small town. Marcola was a logging community with a lot of guys working out the woods. I love growing up in a small town, but like many others from humbling, humble beginnings, I carried low expectations and no dreams.
I wasn't looking down the road.
The change of schools didn't help me because even though I never did my homework and I wasn't considered smart, I also wasn't dumb.
I began to get good grades. I ended up getting straight days when I was a senior.
It's a freaking dramatic change.
I got so lucky because I joined the military and I just got put on a path.
This is what you got to do.
Now that structure is important.
Freaking so good.
Now you're in a playing football.
And do you think that impacted sort of, you start playing football. You start having some structure and discipline around that. Does that help your grades? You want to get good grades just to play football or anything like that?
Yeah, I mean, I don't know. I just had a little, I felt smaller school. Maybe he's back in the small pond again.
So I felt a more confident and then playing building a bond with people like the other guys on the team and on our, my road, we lived on the winland road. So there's a bunch of good athletes that live there. So we'd get together and play basketball or football.
And so just that, just competing. I think competition is what is what life, I mean, that's kind of a mistake.
I felt for a long time I made with the raise of my own kids is I learned right there that life is competition and competition is what made me like, hey, I got, I have to go one on one with, we just do these drills like football, one on one. You try to get over this line. They try to get over this line. It's just whoever can you stop them or he can he stop you.
So I realize those battles, that's what makes especially a man is like, we got to compete. That's what we're here for. So when I kind of skip to head, but with my kids, I like, no, you guys life is going to break you if you're not built for this shit. So then I thought, well, maybe that pushed them too hard to compete. So it's like, you know, how life is you're like, one all one way or all the other.
But anyway, I was learning how to compete there and it gave me confidence. And you start running then too. And you had a buddy Donnie Manila, is it?
And you guys are sort of sort of sort of best friends scenario and he's he's a quarterback. Yep.
And you're his wide receiver. Yep. So you guys are bros out freaking. Oh, yeah, practicing every. Yeah, and shape and getting half grit.
Yeah. You talk about the fact that you're you kind of had to be self sufficient. I mean, this whole time, which is definitely good. Yeah.
Yeah, it's tough at that time, but it's good for any any person. Yeah, eventually you're going to have to, you know, take care of yourself.
Yeah, you know, going back to that competition thing. I know in the SEAL team is we always joke around like if you're with another SEAL, whatever you're doing is a race.
Well, whether or not, sometimes it can get pretty stupid, because sure it's cool when you're running arts, cool when you're shooting, but then it's like, hey, we're going to go drink.
Let's see if you can do better. Yeah, not as great to win that one.
Yeah, that's not a great one.
You also end up going to your grandma's house, which seems like, I'm like, oh, that's that's quaint, but it's a 20 mile bike ride. You got it. Yeah, so it's a 40 mile round trip.
What are you doing up there?
She lived in town, so she lived by Hayward Field. I lived in the house skirts on this in that small town. So I would ride there and sold two lane road all the way into town.
And then I would hang out watching TV, walk up to Eldon's market. She had a tab up there, so to go buy stuff. Good end Amazon pool just kind of play basketball hang out, but that was like my I could get away from my stepdad. My dad could swing by because it was his mom. So I could see my dad maybe he still lived in town, but I don't know what he's doing.
And so it's kind of a, you know, she'd give me mate, saltine crackers with butter on them, pretty good life. And then what your other, your other, I guess maybe your mom side had a ranch that ranch in Eastern Oregon.
You went out, worked on that. Yeah, yeah, I did. My grandpa was a horse trainer and super tough. He's, you know, he left home. I think he lied to get in the service in his 15 or 16.
And, you know, was in the military just tough, tough dude. And he got into horses. He did rode yo when he got out of the service and then started training and and breeding horses. So I'd go over there and work and he had he was tough tough guy.
Did you ever do rodeo? No. When I, when I watched that, like, yeah, I don't like to get injured, right? You know, I mean, none of us like to get injured, when you get injured, you know, you feel like it's horrible.
Yeah, like the old world's on a part and I feel like the biggest whim when I get injured because I'm always like, I can't, you know, I've jumped my finger and my grips and I feel like just like, and then you know guys that you know have lost legs and they're driving on.
But man, when I watched rodeo people, how are they not getting majorly injured every freaking time? The durable damn. Yeah, that and I want to ever watch rugby. Yeah, those guys are tough too. I went watch a rugby game like a year ago and same thing every play. I was shuddering and you know, so, you know, a lot of times you get that feeling when you watch a sport, you like hockey do that.
Yeah, you know, you're like, oh, yeah, I'll do that. If I trained hard, I could get in there. You know, you're, but I was watching this rugby game going, I actually don't want to do that.
I actually do not want to do that. These guys are impact every single time. So you're out there and this is like typical ranch stuff where you're learning the like extra hard work is getting after it. Yeah, yeah, just get up early, get a little horses fed and watered.
I would, because he had race horses. So he bred quarter horses and I would go and warm them up before the races. So it's called a jocky boy. And so I'd get on there.
And to do that, I had to know horses. The horse can tell whether, you know, the person on them knows what the fuck they're doing, especially horses that are all wound up for the races. It's, that was pretty intense, but I like doing it.
How long do it take you to get comfortable on the horses? Was that like your introduction to it that summer? No, I would, I would ride every time I went there.
So you kind of grew up doing it. Yeah. And then when I worked for him, he, I'm trying to think, I think he paid me.
So it seems like it was 100 and for some reason, it's 76 a month, but then I had to pay for all my own stuff. So like food and water. Yeah, and like, I'm, I remember he took me to, to buy clothes like jeans and a cowboy hat and things like this and that came out of 100, 7 years.
I thought he was hooking me up. Now, Grandpa Bob, you got a different way. No, no, he was, yeah.
So you learn a lot from him and, and I'm a fast forward a little bit. You say I learned something else from Grandpa Bob, I was taught that tomorrow is not guaranteed.
My mom's mother drove her car over from their ranch in eastern Oregon to visit, to visit and go to my homecoming football game on Friday.
Late Thursday night, the sheriff's department called and told us that Papa had died and an automobile accident.
It was very painful to hear this since Grandpa Bob was a huge part of my teenage years. The following night, the homecoming game was tough to get through, but I had a good game and made some difficult catches.
Papa taught me to give everything you have each day and the only thing that mattered was winning.
When the horse wins, the trainer, the jockey and the family get to take a photo in the winter circle.
Anything less than that is a failure.
Check.
That was, was that your senior year then?
That was junior junior junior year.
Fast forward a little bit. You graduated earlier. You graduated when you were 17 years old.
And then you get a job at Safeway.
Yeah, I kind of forgot this part of the book, but my, it was weird. My family moved when I was 17.
So they, they were going to go to Arizona and I just said, I'm not going to Arizona.
And so I stayed and they moved. They only stayed there two weeks, but they moved back when I never moved back home.
Wait, what did you get like a place to stay with your buddies or something? No, I stayed with my girlfriend. She was a senior too. So we're kind of kind of sounds odd.
I mean, right now if I imagine my daughter, like us moving my daughter to senior, I couldn't imagine this.
Hey, good luck. Keep in touch.
Yeah, and by the way, moving with some other high senior.
I know anyway, so I stayed, they moved back and never moved back in and then I ended up getting the job at Safeway.
Cause I wanted to wait my vanilla. He was a year behind me. So I learned I needed, we're going to go to a chart plate called football together.
So I worked for a year in between waiting.
And then you end up getting to Southern Oregon State and you try out for the football team.
You say after I tried, after trying to make the team I read, she ordered for Southern Oregon State, meaning everyday I practiced against the starting defense.
There were definitely some beasts out there on the field. I definitely wasn't one of them.
It was fun, especially since there were some elite athletes on the field who eventually made it to the NFL.
The irony of college was that throughout my high school years, I never drank even one beer.
All I cared about was sports and grades. I knew I wasn't an elite athlete, but I'd still tried my hardest, especially because I wanted to impress my dad.
What I learned at Southern Oregon was that even though I wasn't good enough to play college football, I knew how to party.
I drank a lot of beer and eventually went back to Eugene with this new mastered skill.
So you didn't drink at all growing up.
And then you get to college.
It just like the stereotypical friggin, you could just go get it.
Yeah, I mean, you know how if you're on the football team, you can go to any party, you know, always girls always, always, you know, we had this dorm that was asked but haul was just football player.
So there's always girls there. There's like a big open shower and there'd be guys and girls in the shower to say, it's like, I'm like this.
I don't know what heaven is like, but feels like it should be like this.
So anyway, it was, it was a lot different.
One of my buddies in the Siltians played football at University of Texas and obviously it's like a religion down there and I was like, what was it like, you know, being on the football team down there and he goes,
like a jallie green giant walking the earth.
He said, you literally, he said he literally could do anything he wanted to have.
You know, you know, you know, you know, he could never bought a beer, you know, feels like the seas parted when he showed up. He said it was freaking ridiculous.
So how long did you stay there for?
This year. So one year.
Yeah, one year. But yeah, I mean, so it wasn't like Texas, but for that little, that was the Ashwin Oregon, for that little town.
Yeah, it was kind of a big deal if you're there.
Yeah, it's fun.
It won't made you stop.
What made you decide to not go to college anyway?
I just didn't have money. So nobody's paying. I had financial aid and I was getting money. And so it was about 5,000 a year living down there. And I was a walk on. So I didn't get any scholarship or anything like that.
So I just didn't have money.
Yeah, did you have any vision?
Yeah, because I think a lot of kids just go to college because that's like you're supposed to what it is.
Yeah, it's just like that's like the normal chain of command as you got to get your college degree.
So we tell I tell my kids, Tanner who's in the service. He tried.
That's what my oldest one, but I went through first and you know, told him, no, you're going to go to school.
You're going to get a degree and I could tell.
It's just not happening.
But anyway, I've found it that trap too.
Yeah, no, you go to college.
Yeah, especially you go there for a year and you're like, what am I even doing here?
Yeah, you know, I get in trunk, whatever spending money. Why, why have you been here?
Yeah, I got decent grades. I mean, I took creative writing. So it's like I always liked writing. So at least I did that.
Yeah, that's an interesting thread that's throughout the book is your, I know obviously this book is sort of the apex of that journey.
But yeah, the fact that you were always kind of into writing.
So you get you leave college, go back, go back home and now you're working.
You're working in a warehouse for $4.72 an hour according to the book.
That's right.
As a working part time, going to go into Lane Community College and, you know, my, my truck, little Toyota tool,
dry was just full of beer cans all the time because we just go up in the woods and build a fire at the rock pit and drink and
That's what I mean, I would go scout deer. I always like taking pictures.
So I go look for bucks and bowls and try to take pictures of them in the mornings, but then I would, you know, drink for the weekends and the afternoon.
Yeah, you say, here, wasn't like I was letting anybody down. Nobody expected anything from Cameron Haynes.
So I didn't expect anything out of myself. No.
Fast forward a little bit.
Thankfully, Roy kept on me and kept encouraging me to bow on telling me it's way better than hunting with a gun.
That there were less people and that I would enjoy it. Roy got me started, but the only way I could build confidence in anything was to go out and do it.
Soon I focused my energy on bow hunting like athletics. It provided a challenge.
I found the perfect thing to work hard at something that challenged me that not everybody was good at when I was successful at bow hunting.
It gave me a lot of confidence for young man having confidence and getting positive reinforcement in anything was a powerful spark for change in my life.
Here's the truth. I'm an average guy who has experienced above average bow hunting success over the past three decades.
One thing is for sure if I can do it anyone can. I came from nothing and had no one pushing me or even believing in me.
For this reason, my story proves that in bow hunting, the most average person can achieve the grandest of dreams.
There's a lot of hell of a lot of hard work in between average person and dreams on that one.
So how did you know Roy? Roy Roth?
He went to a Mohawk. He was a year ahead of me. He was in his wife and my class. He was like the brain of the class. I think she could have got valedictorian maybe.
So that was Jill.
But we didn't hang out because he, I just did the football basketball baseball. He had a trap line and would always be in the woods trapping. He did play football. He's good at football and baseball, but no basketball.
But we didn't really hang out or anything. But he, he was always the guy if I had a hunting question. I'd be like, I'm just, yes, Roy. He's like the best in the school.
And so he, from there, we kind of built a relationship when I was still rifle hunting and then he inspired me to buy a bow and get going down that road.
You say I run into a lot of people who are new to bow hunting. They get a bow going on in the discover it's just too difficult. So they quit. I understand.
I missed 16 deer the first year I went bow hunting. So I've been there. What if I'd given up after the first year? There's the question once again, what if?
Here's the reason why bow hunting is both exciting and excruciating. It's difficult and frustrating as hell, especially when you're used to hunting with a rifle. People become used to the ritual of seeing an animal in rifle range and then boom, it's over.
It's done. You've made the shot. The animal is dead. With a bow being in bow range doesn't mean anything. Even if the animal is in rifle range, when your bow hunting, the hunt has just started.
Moving from rifle range into bow range means you're moving into the animal's red zone and that ups the challenge immensely and bow hunting. There's no guarantee it's going to work out.
For me, I never like to fail. I didn't want to be a failure with the bow. So after that first year of killing the spike bow elk, my second season behind the bow, I killed a pope and young three by three black tail, a rag horn five by five bow and a bear with a $200 bow and using $30 binoculars.
I can only afford to hunt an organ instead of traveling anywhere out of the state. I bought three tags and filled three tags. The second year of bow hunting wasn't just memorable for me. It was monumental.
You came out of the gate. Going hard. Yeah, I mean that was a finely found because as you, you know, we've kind of went through this journey. I wasn't good. Really not like a natural at anything is all work and then I got to bow hunting and I'm like, well, I can work hard and then have these.
What I considered a very, you know, pretty high above average, maybe excellent results and I didn't know anybody killing a bull buck and bear with their bow that was like there's like a we'd lump those all together in one word bull buck bear.
And if you could get that done is your bow. That's freaking bad. Yeah, it wasn't happening. So I felt really getting that was just my second season. So it gave me a lot of confidence.
How many arrows were you shooting in the offices and getting ready for that were you were you kind of obsessed out of the gate? Yeah, yeah, I shot way more than that I do now. Yeah, I mean, I had to shot for hours. Yeah, loved it.
How did you get the feel for like the hunt part the wind was Roy teaching you that stuff? No, that was just, you know,
I was like, right, for hunting, you don't really need to know that, but I was in the woods a lot, you know, whether I was hunting or going with somebody. So as learning, you kind of hunting is all about, well, not all about there's a lot of different things that you got to read the country, you got to read the animal behavior is a big part of it learning their tendencies and then what you can get away with them.
And I see you and so I would, as I said, you know, I would go out and take pictures a lot too. So I always out trying to get photos and then hunting all the time. So I just was naturally just learning more all these reps all this time in the and the mountains.
So then when it came time for to actually try to kill something, I had a big advantage because I had just been out there at the time spent, you know, and I just felt pretty natural, but I still had to learn about the wind had to learn about when an arrow hits an animal and you're reading the blood trail where that blood's from the injury you've caused the animal.
You know, how to trail that thing, whether it's hoof marks in soft soil or rocks overturned different things. Furns would be kind of indicate the direction of travel. So you had still had to look a lot of woodsmanship goes in to successful bohani. So I had to learn that that just takes time.
Were you going with anybody? Were you primarily like that first year where you got the bullbuck and bear.
Booze was anyone going with you? My brother went sometimes. I think when I killed that buck, he was there too.
And then the bull, let me think, know the bull eyes by myself, bear by myself.
Yeah, I guess the reason I'm kind of pausing here is like I said me being an amateur hunter and having been guided on hunts by experts.
Or sometimes even multiple sometimes I've gone out with both John W. and a guide with me at the same time. So there's like two people that are experts.
Right. And the amount of information that they're feeding me, the amount of things that are going on during a hunt is there's so much going on.
I mean, the reaction of the animals, the wind, the terrain, like all those things are going on. I've had when I've hunted, I've had people feeding me that information, you know.
And for you to be out there on your second season pulling that off, that's freaking impressive, man. And I don't want, and the other reason I'm kind of like diving into this is because I said, oh, how many arrows did you shoot?
And shoot in the arrows?
Yeah, you've got to be able to shoot the arrows, but there's so much more to it that I didn't want to make it sound like, oh, hey, if I shoot a bunch of arrows, and I can hit that target at it, freaking 60 yards, I'm going to be good to go.
I think hunting is like when you're driving somewhere, and if you're not driving, not really paying attention. You know what I mean? I feel like hunting can be like that too. If you're not making the calls, you can have people telling you, just like you can have somebody drive you down here.
If somebody's driving, like if I had to repeat how I got to right here to the studio today, I took an Uber, so I don't know. But when you're hunting, when you're making the calls that it might be a rough go, you might fail a lot, but you're also learning more than I think you have some great mentors on the hunt.
But I think it's hard that's a hard situation to learn that firsthand experience also because you're kind of, you're doing what they say. You know what I mean?
So for me, it was, it was hard, but it was a big advantage to learn that on my own, make those mistakes on my own. And it just, I think being by myself so much as a kid, I was fine being by myself.
I was used to being alone my whole life really. So just being out in the woods, that's just, that was an easy transition.
Now I'm by myself, but I'm doing something. I'm not by myself, you know, staring at the wall, even she does.
Yeah, that's again, just to reiterate the amount that goes in to pulling this off is ridiculously hard. These, this is a freaking challenging, challenging thing to do.
So I just don't want to, don't want to short sell it at all.
Yeah, I mean, there's still hunts now, even after all these years where I'm like, I wonder, I'm like, how have I ever killed anything with an arrow?
I mean, it just seems, it feels impossible on some of these hunts because it's not just getting close.
I mean, that's, you find the animal, that's okay. Now we've started something, at least we've got a target, right?
But then so much has to go right. And then if you're trying to film as you know, I think you know, some of yours has been filmed and other guys are there.
So it's like there's however much, you know, three guys, three times and always three times a sand, three times a movement.
It's tough.
There's a lot of shit that can go sideways.
And it does, and so again, what I was, my point was sometimes I wonder myself, I'm like, I don't know how I've ever done this. It feels, feels like it's just not going to happen.
Well, you've made it happen a lot.
Get into your third season. You say I was invaded by invited by Wayne and Dakota, join him in the country.
He had hunted since he was a young boy, Wayne owned the bull rack.
And I only say it like that because it's kind of like legendary, even though it never even been there.
Yeah. The archery pro shop in Springfield, Oregon opened in 1971. Wayne Roy Roth,
Dwayne Levitt, right?
Jeff Brooks and I ventured toward the legendary Steans Mountain.
And there, you say this, my shot was perfect.
The arrow went into the last rib and stopped at the far side of the shoulder, meaning I only had one hole, the entrance from which to leave blood.
I was using a thunderhead 125s, which are good tough heads that did the job.
That one perfect arrow put the bull down quickly, even though I had scant blood trail to follow.
The Roosevelt bull was a big-bodied beast though, and is heavy hoofs scarred the soft soil deeply.
I followed his fresh deep-cutting tracks for 50 yards down the hill before pulling back a wet fur bow,
revealing the fallen beast in a tango of fireweed.
This dark antlered 5x5 was my best bull to date.
I remember every detail of these hunts, like they were yesterday, hence the saying,
the beast is dead, long live the mighty beast.
Bow hunting had gotten in my soul.
At that time I had no idea how would it end up directing my every step through the journey of life.
Chuck.
Despite my growth and success in Bow hunting, I was still going nowhere in my life.
I was 22 to 23 years old.
It's such a good contrast, like you're kicking ass out in the woods.
And yet, 23 years old living with four guys drank beer all the time.
One of my roommates got two DUIs and three weeks, both while driving my truck.
I was glad I hadn't, I wasn't driving those times, it was just a matter of luck.
More a matter of luck than good decision making.
I just never got caught.
I wasn't living healthfully, and still didn't have a real sense of purpose.
I wasn't accountable for anything or anybody.
I felt shitty all the time.
A wake-up call arrived when I crashed my truck one night while driving drunk.
I was driving too fast and flipped the vehicle, rolling it.
The roof was crushed all the way down to the top of the seat.
The truck was totaled.
Of course, I didn't remember a thing.
Damn, just straight black out driving.
Yeah.
I could have easily died or killed someone.
Did I wake up?
No, not yet.
Did I see some connection between me walking away from the crash.
And my dad walking away from his was I following in his alcoholic footsteps.
My life would become a living living with a bunch of guys just partying,
basically working during the week going to clubs and weekends, just drinking at the apartment
or on the lake.
It was a great life.
Yeah, I would usually on the weekends.
I would get up and go.
We lived on the second floor of the Chase Village apartments,
and I'd go out and look and see if my truck was there.
And I had driven my truck.
And I'd have to go see.
So if the truck was there, I'd go back in.
I'd be like, where's my truck?
You remember you left to the Scandia days or whatever.
They had all the likes.
No, damn.
So just, you know, just being an idiot.
Yeah.
You say the same year, I killed my first bill in 1989.
I wrote my first hunting article.
I was going to go to the Bulls, Bughals, and Baches for Western Bow Hunter.
So you're getting a writing pretty quickly out of the gate with this.
It's cool in the book.
You got a bunch of the articles.
Cliped out.
So you're on this kind of, well, I'll use your word.
Luser, path.
Yeah.
I wouldn't say that, but you got into the book.
You say being a loser isn't cool.
And not being a loser, Dad.
When Tanner, our first son, was born in 1993, something inside of me switched.
They say, parenthood changes everything, and it did for me.
Suddenly, I wasn't just on my own.
Now I was affecting other people's lives.
I got to be an example.
Alcohol was poison.
I had seen what alcohol did to my dad, ruining what he could have been.
Something incredible.
And I was seeing it do the same thing to me.
Sorry, stop drinking.
Alcohol wasn't going to help me in any area of my life.
Especially with my hunting.
I'm not judging anybody else, but for me, I had to quit drinking.
So Tanner, coming along is really the seems like from the book, it's the catalyst for
real change in your life.
Yeah.
I mean, people always say, and maybe it's true for them, but they say, well, you know, I don't
know that there's this thing, like if your father's an alcoholic, then you have a greater
chance being an alcoholic and like this keeps this whole thing going, right?
And then people learn from it, this and that, and it all sounds good.
I didn't really, I knew all that.
I didn't really care.
Even when Tanner was born, I felt different, and I was like, okay, this isn't just me being a 20
summer-year-old guy, just going to the club.
That's what it feels like everybody does.
But then with the kid, but then still, I was like, well, I should, I probably shouldn't be a
dipshit like this, but I still was.
I still, I'm not drink for a little while, and I, you know, whatever, go back out.
You know, Tanner was around, so my wife, we were just in our 20s, you know, mid 20s.
And I wasn't, I was still doing stupid shit.
And so it wasn't just like, right when he was born, it still took a while.
Right?
And I still was still fucked up.
You know, I mean, I would still drink and drive, I remember leaving the Oregon football game.
I'd drive in over all the cones and this cop jumped out, told me to pull over.
And I was just, why am I driving over the cones?
I don't know.
It's half time drinking for the, for the whole game.
And I had to do a walking test, like, a DUI test there with everybody leaving the Oregon football
game, you know, and somehow I passed.
I have no idea how, but I never got a DUI, but the point is, it's like, it still took a
little bit.
It wasn't just a light switch.
I still, you know, I hadn't run around a marathon yet, so I hadn't really tapped
into like dedication.
I was having success with the bow.
I was having a little thing.
I still didn't have a great job.
What was your job at this time?
I was still in that warehouse.
I worked at that warehouse.
I was part time in the Northwest School, and I got full time.
And guys would kind of listen to me, so they made me a lead.
And I worked there for nine years.
And then by kind of by the end of that nine years, I was starting to figure things out a
little bit.
And I got this job, same job I have right now at Springfield, Utility Board.
And it's like, you know, like we're here in San Diego, San Diego, Water and Power, whatever
it's called, it's always a good, good job.
And for me, for somebody like me, a job at a, I mean, just a
utility, it's about as good as it's going to get.
Right?
People are always going to need water and power.
I mean, have a paycheck, good benefits.
Like, okay, this is kind of total stability.
Yeah, yeah.
And I could provide for my family.
I still felt like a kid, but I'm like, kind of supposed to have all these, you know, these
pay all these bills and have cars and have this house and do all this, but I didn't feel like.
I, I don't know, it just felt like still like a lot for me.
And so I, I ended up getting the job on the construction crew at the Springfield Utility Board.
Yeah, so I started there at like $7 an hour.
I'd moved up at the warehouse.
I was, they promoted me to supervisors the same day.
I gave my notice and quit because I got hired at the utility, but so I was making like 13
there and then I had to go back down to seven to start at the, at the utility board.
But yeah, so just trying to get it figured out.
Yeah.
Back to the hunting a little bit.
You see in the book, it's been said that life offers two paths, one easy and one hard.
As Roy and I entered the unforgiving sanctuary of the Eagle Cap wilderness for the first time in
witness the awe inspiring.
While Lawa, how do you say that?
Well, Lawa mountains in northeast Oregon.
It was obvious that we had chosen the latter.
We were always drawn toward the more difficult path to us.
The longer was always better.
You see, talking about Roy a little bit here.
Both hunting in general is hard.
There are lots of tough men who do it, but it's not easy.
The mountains can break even the toughest man.
Roy, rough as the toughest human I ever met and ever seen out in the mountains.
Hands down Roy was the toughest bow hunter I'd ever seen and he always carried the best attitude.
I learned so much from him.
He is a big part of the reason I am the person I am today.
As a kid, I always knew Roy was good in the woods.
He could always get the best fishing holes before the rest of us.
We nicknamed him Gazelle Roy because he was big, but moved like a gazelle.
He was a great athlete.
He played football and he was really good at baseball playing third baseman.
From the moment Roy told me I should start bow hunting, we connected and hit it off.
From then on, we started hunting together and we just clicked because we had no limits on how much misery
we could suffer to chase success.
You guys rolled out into this mountain wilderness area.
You encounter another hunter who tells you guys about this spot where Billy Cruz used to go.
What's the legend of Billy Cruz?
Billy Cruz was just a badass.
He started Oregon bow company, which was the bow I shot at that time.
In junction city back there in Oregon.
I actually didn't know Billy Cruz.
I knew of him and it seemed as a picture as well.
This dentist that was in the wilderness.
He said, we came from this trailhead way back here, something like 20 miles away.
I said we just want to get away from people.
He was like, oh, okay, he goes well.
I can send you to a place and nobody goes.
He goes, it's two rugged for horses, two steep for men, all this stuff.
He goes the only person that ever goes there is Billy Cruz.
That sounds good.
You and Roy are like, yeah, it was awesome.
That was, but also I kind of, I did learn something from that too because what I learned at that time
has been proven over and over again is rugged country like that.
If men who spend a lot of time in it die often, it's just part of the the mountains are so unforgiving
and Billy Cruz died back there.
And he died in a plane crash, but it's like if while he's scouting elk in those mountains.
And I just, it just gets proven over and over again.
People go in the get a taste of the mountains they come back, but the longer you spend there the more you're kind of,
you know, you're just playing the rock and roll on the dice.
But in the meantime, we did go there and I ended up hunting back in that same country for many years,
Roy moved to Alaska after that first season, but yeah, it was amazing.
We never saw anybody back there.
Super rugged.
This is kind of cool.
You say, you know, one of your favorite books of all time is hunting with the bow and arrow by Dr.
Sachs and Pope written in 1923.
And you call out a couple of parts on page 181 it reads,
we also began preparing ourselves for the contest.
Although habitually in good physical condition, we undertook special training for the big event.
In this case, he and young were preparing for a grizzly bow hunt, Pope continues.
By running, the use of dumbbells and other gymnastic practices,
we strengthened our muscles and increased our endurance.
Regarding the backcountry hunt, he writes,
we were there to win and nothing else matter mattered.
Adding later, we were trained down to the raw hide and sinu,
keyed to alertness and ready for any emergency.
Seems like that could be like the root of you saying,
hey, I can get them freaking better shape for this shit.
Yeah, I mean, there's 100 years ago.
And those guys knew that at that time that,
hey, we need to be out our best to be in these mountains and get animals killed with an arrow.
100 years ago, these guys are freaking training training.
Yeah.
Did you like make that connection?
No.
No, because when I started training, so hunting the hunter community is steeped in tradition,
obviously, the tradition isn't guys like Saxon, Pope and Art Young.
It's guys that like maybe my stepdad who they're just getting away,
going to deer camp.
We're not training for this.
This is kind of a vacation.
So when I first got into it, I started doing this running and doing this thing.
I need to be a little better.
I got a lot of pushback from the hunting community itself.
And I said, you know, you don't need to run a marathon to kill an elk,
but I know this guy and that guy and they kill animals all the time,
and they're overweight.
And Roy was actually over, you know, he's a big dude overweight.
But the difference is he was just so much tougher and better than most guys.
So they would, but they'd use that as an example of why you don't need to be in shape.
And I'd be like, well, okay, you're not Roy.
First of all.
And but I got for years pushback and still probably still do.
I just don't pay attention to him.
But people hunters just don't want to, because it kind of puts the owner's back on them.
Like, God, do I have to take this shit more serious?
What do I got to do here?
Ah.
So like you said, Roy moves to Alaska.
And you go, it's pretty, not funny, it's not the word, but you can't find anybody else really to hunt with.
No.
He must have been one of those bastards just like strong and can just carry his weight.
It's no factor.
No, he, I mean, there's a, I can't remember if I talk about it in there,
but one time we're on Prince of Wales Island.
Here's his attitude wrapped up.
To hunt Prince of Wales for Black Bear, you need a boat.
It's all on the island chain.
You got to go to open water sometimes.
There's tides coming in and out.
So there's, there's, the water is pretty dangerous out there.
But we had boat motor problems.
And without a boat, the motor running right out there,
it was not only dangerous, but you couldn't get anywhere.
So he's like, I'm going to take this motor off and go into town,
Craig, Alaska, which is there in South East Alaska.
And but it's about 15 miles on the water.
And he had this little like 10 or 12 foot raft that he had to put a piece of plywood on,
put the motor on and kind of lay down and kind of hold the front of it because to get on
step that it was coming up, you know.
And so he would have to lay and he did 15 miles all the way in there on a Sunday,
bought this new motor for 4,000 bucks.
And it's all the way, I don't know, he got her right on actually a big ship.
And I could see him.
I was seeing him coming the next day and I'm like, look, I think I see Roy on there
and they're like toeing this little raft.
Just tied to a rope behind it.
And I'm like, so anyway, it was what, and he did this at midnight.
He took off.
He's like, well, no, this is what we got to do.
Just buy himself by himself.
And when he bought this, you know, 4,000 dollar motor,
brought it back out, we're back in business, killing bear.
But that, that whatever it took,
that's the attitude right there, hey, oh, this isn't working.
Here's what we got to do, whatever it takes to make this happen.
Most people aren't like that.
Yeah, no, that's, that's next level.
Yeah.
You say then, after he moves to Alaska for the next 12 years,
I ended up hunting in the sprawling, unforgiven eagle cap wilderness,
most of the time on my own.
My entire existence seemingly revolved around preparing for just one crack at the wilderness,
bulls and bucks where Billy cruised it walked.
I learned more about myself on those solo haunts than I could have in a lifetime in the everyday world.
One of the things you've learned, you talk about, are you willing to bleed?
In most cases, it takes some blood to achieve your goals.
The farther you go, the fewer who will be able to go,
or we willing to go with you.
I knew that if I could get back farther into the wilderness,
I could find better hunting.
I could get away from other hunters if I wasn't better shape.
And if I was mentally stronger, I could outlast anyone.
This is sort of like this.
It's really cool to read the book and there's so many good details in here
to see your evolution as you're in.
Kind of pioneering this attitude of like,
oh, I can just outwork and go further and I'll end up being alone out there.
Yeah.
And that's what I want.
That's, that was the only way I could up my odds.
Now, we get to go hunt some great country.
Money can get you that opportunity,
or knowing the right people can get you that opportunity.
So that ups your eyes a little bit.
You're still very hard.
You know, as you know, still very hard.
But you'll earn opportunity.
But for me at that time, the only way to earn opportunity
was, I had no advantage.
I had no money advantage.
All people in the regular society, they're smarter, more money, more connections,
more whatever.
I always down at the bottom.
In the mountains, I'm like, okay, I call the shots back here now.
All those advantages you have on the outside, don't mean shit back here.
Now, if I'm in better shape than you and I know this country better,
and I'm willing to work harder than you,
this is, this is my country.
This is, I call the shots.
This is my domain.
I'm laughing and smiling over here because all the money in the world
isn't going to carry your ass up that freaking hill.
No, that's it.
And that's the first time I ever felt like, you know,
because I hadn't felt like shit my whole life, you know,
as far as, I don't know what, where I stood and I guess a ladder of success.
And now, of a sudden, I'm like, what are you second?
This is different.
It felt different.
The challenge for me at that time was,
I was trying not to be, I was selfish because it's,
I mean, I found something that, like, for me was good,
but now I had family home, so I'd be back there all the time
and I'd be like, should I be back away from my family?
Because it wasn't like a job.
And were you making any kind of connection towards what it could turn into?
No, just a reason to just meet.
No, I was just, you know, this is just what I wanted to do.
So it was like a selfish thing.
Because people can justify all the time,
well, I gotta do this for work.
So I gotta travel for work.
And it's like, it gives us, it's easy to say,
well, you know, people have to do that.
We're providing it for the family.
Something like that.
I'm gonna sell an article for 50 bucks
and be away from my family for 10 days.
That doesn't pencil out.
But it's just like, I felt like that's what I needed to do.
Because when I wasn't doing that, I was at home.
I was miserable.
Then I felt like maybe I wanted to go drinking
or maybe how am I getting this, you know,
a buzz, I guess.
But I used to get home from work at like six o'clock.
Maybe seven o'clock at night.
Walking, put my work bag down, pick up my jitzie bag
and go to jitzie for two hours.
And I did that every night.
I did that every night.
And I remember sometimes where my wife would be looking at me
with just like a combination of anger
and lack of understanding, like,
like, like, what, like, what are you serious right now?
Like, this is what you're doing.
You got three kids and you're home for nine minutes
and you're gonna leave.
And I did that every night.
And you know, when I, when,
what was interesting was my wife eventually realized
that if I didn't do that,
I had, I would, I would be,
I would be, I wouldn't be happy.
I would be like, like, not, not have a good attitude
about stuff, right?
Because I felt like that was what I needed to do.
And yeah, there's, I unfortunately,
I never really thought about it as being selfish
until you just said that right now.
I guess I realized that even at the time,
but I always kind of
kind of rationalize this thing where I'd kind of related
to my regular job, I'd say, well, hey, you know,
I need to be able to do this in case I'd end up
on a situation where I gotta use this stuff in combat
and I'd be kind of my rationalization.
I'd even try and rationalize that to my wife sometimes,
but my wife, not an idiot, and she'd be like,
hey, listen, you got freaking a rifle, a pistol,
and two knives, and you think you're gonna have to choke
a person I don't even know about.
Yeah.
So, yeah, I think it is, you know,
you have some, some, like, primordial urges
as a human, you know, to fight or to hunt.
Like, it seems like it's almost caveman brain.
For me, it got really focused on fighting.
For you, it got really focused on hunting.
Both those are total primal instincts to have, you know?
So, here's an example.
You got the book of how you're living your life.
On Friday afternoon, I leave work around 4pm,
driving through the North Portland, through North Portland,
arriving at 1 a.m. at my Eagle Cap Trailhead.
I'd load up my pack and start walking.
Try to get 12 miles or so in by first light,
once sleep, get back in there by first light Saturday morning,
be able to hunt or scout until Sunday,
then I would hike out and drive home Sunday night.
Being back at work on Monday morning,
two nights, no sleep, two days,
it's scouting or hunting.
If it was the season, it was worth it.
These trips gave me the confidence to do my long,
so LeHonsh I was testing myself, passing each test.
What caught me, what caught me on that one was like,
this isn't even hunting season.
This is you're just going out there to scout
and get to know the terrain.
Yeah, so it's your wife's piss.
Right, I mean, and I, so it kind of is frustrating
in a little bit, and at that time,
I wasn't like, oh, I'm going to prove all these people wrong.
I mean, kind of I was proving people wrong.
I felt like, but it was more like I just felt like I would
need it to do that, or I wanted to do that,
maybe to be selfish.
But now people see like, where you are now,
you're going to be on your right of book, or you're teaching
leadership, and there's like people see everything,
like you get a lot of attention, because now you're somebody.
But it was the dues you paid going to every night you'd go
to training after work, or if I'd do that.
The reason why you get to here is because you had all that
sacrifice, you made all those sacrifices for time
and for work, and it's like, I wanted to ask those people,
what the fuck are you doing?
What your word? I mean, what were of you sacrificed?
Yeah, of course, that's easy to be invious of this.
When you're like, oh, you got this,
me followers in your sponsor to hear this, and that's like,
yeah, that's what about all the grind.
And the grind where I would be back there,
and I'd be like, I shouldn't be back here.
And I should be at home, I should be being a dad,
and I should be this or that, and I'd be like, well,
you can, and you kind of alluded to it,
you can justify almost anything.
And I'd be like, well, no, I'm not going to be happy
if I'm back here, and I'll be a better dad when I get home,
and I'll be, you know, I'm showing my kids,
and when I got a little older, I'd be like, well,
I'm showing my, I'm an example for my kids
and showing them what hard work can lead to.
I 100% use that.
I want 100%.
I matter of fact, I told, I, I, I would tell like other seals,
you know, if they would say, get worried about, hey,
you know, I'm going on to pull him in again.
I'd say, listen, man, guys have been going on
to employment for thousands of years
and leaving their kids at home.
And that's the example that the kids see.
You know, that the dad's going on the employment.
By the way, when you went on to employment,
back in freaking, whatever, a 500 years ago,
your deployment was seven years long.
Right. You're the employment was five years,
you're even World War II.
In World War II, you went, you left for war in 1941
or 1942, and you came home when it was over.
Yeah.
That's some commitment.
So, because guys were, the reason that this would get brought up
was guys would get worried about primarily
be worried about like their sons.
Hey, you know, I feel like, you know, I'm leaving my son too much.
I said, hey, the moms have been raising young warriors
for thousands of years.
Right.
You don't need to worry about that.
They're, they're going to look at you and think,
hey, this is what, this is what I'm supposed to do.
Yeah.
So they'll figure it out.
That sometimes that justification would kind of turn into
civilization for be traded.
You want a Thursday night after I'd been free to trade it all week or
whatever.
And the dads have to be gone for the moms to be able to use
a way to your dad gets home.
True.
That's how they raise those warriors.
Speaking of all this, I'm a worker.
The truth is, I've always worked really hard because I've never
really felt like I had a ton of natural skills or talent.
It would feel unnatural for me not to have a regular job.
I feel like such a life is reserved for someone who's a star.
And I don't think I got that.
So I grind it out.
I grind it out at training and I grind it out at work.
Not taking a day off as my only edge.
I can't just say, you know, today I'm going to run.
I've sacrificed enough.
No.
That's what everybody does.
Everybody has an excuse.
Everybody has a reason.
You can always come up with a reason not to go after a challenge.
So I've learned to never care what the excuse is.
It's never valid.
That's my attitude.
And that's my edge.
It's how I've built endurance and foster resiliency.
There are no rest days in my schedule.
And that's is the reason I excel.
I think it's like no factor.
No factor.
Well, people say like, oh, you take rest days.
I'm like, life gives you rest days.
Yeah.
You know, you get the freaking broken water.
Heeter and all of a sudden you're dealing with that.
Or you know, you get a travel day where it's like, hey,
I'm going to be traveling at whatever time and then the plane
lays over in your near port for four hours in your layover and like,
okay, life is going to give you rest days.
Right.
I don't take them voluntarily.
Not happening.
Well, I have a hard time.
Like even yesterday, you know,
Rihanna went out and Evan was out skydiving and Andy was out there too.
And I was, I paid to actually go and I'm like,
I actually want to go and run.
So I did 14 miles here and went up to the top of the hill over here,
ran along the beach and just would rather work instead of skydiving.
So I don't know.
Maybe I missed out on something, but it's, I just don't,
I feel better.
I don't know.
I just don't feel good unless I've sacrificed.
You know, sweated, worked.
So I can go to bed at night and be like, well,
got it done today.
Yeah, we just had a guy on the podcast named Andrew Huberman and he's a
neuroscientist.
Oh, I love him.
Yeah.
He's a stud.
But he, one of the things that he was one of the points he was making is that
free dopamine.
Dopeamine that you don't earn is like the worst thing in the world.
So dopamine that you get from your, from your phone.
Yeah.
Dopamine that you get from a chocolate chip cookie.
Dopamine that you get that you didn't have to earn is like the worst thing in the world.
And that's probably what you feel.
Is you probably feel like if you don't earn that dopamine,
it doesn't feel right.
Yeah, I mean,
and people always say over train or you've heard all the sleep.
Saying people love talking about or getting enough sleep.
And I don't know.
I just, I just don't, I don't care about any of that.
I mean, I'm going to train every day.
I'm probably not going to get enough sleep.
But it's like that, that is the only edge.
Yeah, just to to sacrifice more.
Yeah.
It's the only reason why anybody knows who I am.
Hard work.
By the way, this whole time you're writing for for bow hunting magazines,
local magazines, you get rejected.
You get rejected by bow hunter magazine.
You write about that there, which is, I mean, that's what happens, right?
Yeah.
That's what happens.
Then you say, I decided to write my first book, bow hunting trophy blacktail.
There was never any grand plan one day.
I decided I wanted to write a book and I wanted to be badass.
Hard back full cover.
So you do that.
And you have to borrow a bunch of money to get the thing published.
Yeah.
It's like 50 grand.
Yeah, it was 50,000.
No, because the book was like over $10 each because it was full color,
full glossy paper.
I didn't know anything about anything.
So made 5,000 of them, 50,000 bucks.
I had like maybe $200 of it.
So I borrowed, I think, 15,000 from my grandma, 10,000 from my other,
from my in-laws, my mom, I think, 15.
Anyway, what year was that?
That was 99.
So like the internet has been around yet.
You can't even sell this thing on the internet, really.
No, no.
You need to have a magazine.
How long were those freaking boxes of books sitting around the house for four years?
I mean, we moved them a couple times.
I had a whole spare bedroom filled.
Because it's at 5,000 books and they're at heavy too.
Yeah, that is not fun.
No, and it took, you know, I and your wife's like, dude, I know.
You spent 50 grand.
Now we got one less room in our house.
I know.
It was like, it was not pencil and out of this is a business plan.
Hey, what's your business plan?
I never did that one time.
Until they said, well, here's what you owe us.
So I'm like, no, I'm writing a book.
I don't, I will self-publish it because nobody said the market's not big enough.
Because it's just blacktailed deer, which is just on the west coast.
Okay, we're gonna wash and California and BC.
And so yeah, it took forever just to even make that money back.
But I paid everybody back.
Took a while.
Where'd you sell the books for?
I think like 20 bucks?
I think 25.
Okay.
Yeah.
And then five shipping. So it was like maybe 29.95.
That's everything.
Yeah.
Packing them up yourself.
How and yeah.
Yeah.
It was a, yeah.
One thing that's awesome about this story, though, is I mean, your story your life is that you two,
it just took something that you love to do.
And just for all in.
Like that's what that's what you're doing.
Yeah.
And that's, I mean, I don't, I don't know.
I don't know how it's worked like this, but it's just been my journey.
But like I've never been like, why want to meet Tiger Woods?
So I'm going to try to golf.
You know what I mean?
It's like everything I've done.
I've met a lot of amazing people.
Only through what I do.
It's never been like just to meet these.
So I've been able to train with the limpians and do all this thing.
Just because it's like, no, they're helping.
You know, I care about this to build endurance.
So I'm going to run with the Olympian to see what I can learn from them or to train with these,
these biggest badasses or to lift weights with these studs, you know, Mark Bell.
I can have those chances to interact just through my thing.
I'm not, I haven't changed anything that I do.
It's just what I do.
But it's staying true to, I'm a bow hunter on my Instagram bio just says bow hunter.
And because of that, I've met, I'm sitting here with you guys.
I'm in a, how incredible is that?
I mean, it just is seem real.
That's what I think is the same thing over here.
Probably, this is free.
You did, and eventually you got in a bow hunter.
And you first, your first thing that you wrote,
this is in 2009 was called bleed.
Yeah. Hell yeah.
Now we get into this little section of life.
I'm going to fast forward.
I started running just for the test to push myself up to 2000.
Most I'd ever run was a 10k, then one time I entered a 7.3 mile race in Salem, Oregon.
And guys thought I was crazy for running that far just to get in shape to hunt.
The black tail woods around home.
Then around a half marathon, then in 2003, I ran my first marathon and finished third overall.
Your first marathon, you finished third overall.
That's freaking legit.
This was about the time I really began to notice that my physical condition could pay.
A huge impact, counting in the woods.
This was where I could improve my game.
Hmm.
And it wasn't like that was a Boston marathon I got third in.
It was like a pretty small marathon in the Gorge.
So it's from the Dallas to Hood River, but I did get third still.
Yeah.
Hell yeah.
Since that first marathon, I've completed in Ultra Marathons, winning Peek Shaped.
I just prior to BoC's and I run at least 20 miles a day.
I've ramped it up in effort to gain not only physical up mental strength,
and it's paid off in many years of consistent success.
You could do the big horn trail run.
That's your first Ultra, which Ultra is anything over 26.2.
Yeah.
You got this for your yeah, even right in your whole life kind of as it shows in this book.
Awesome stories.
You say I led the race until mile 24 or 25.
The problem was the race didn't end at mile 24 or 25.
Yeah.
32 mile.
I finished second overall with a time of four hours and 53 seconds.
It was a great day to be alive.
Almost all the races I run at some time or another.
I want to stop and throw in the towel similarly on many tough horns.
I want to quit and go home to the good life.
So why don't I quit?
What resides in me to keep going?
Maybe it's because I don't want to let people down because I'm a regular guy coming
from a small, a regular small town who dare to dream big about being special and finding some success in life.
Maybe I've always felt like proving people wrong.
As I started running marathons, I realized the connection between endurance racing and hunting.
Because in both disciplines, you're facing huge barriers that make you want to quit.
No one's going to judge if you quit a hunt.
Most people would fail on a hunt.
The same goes for an ultra marathon.
Not many could call you a failure if you didn't last to the finish of a long ultra.
Because most people, you know likely, wouldn't even tow the starting line.
But to me, failure feels like all those people who've doubted me over the years were right.
I can't have that.
And now you've got the full on connection between the better shape I'm in, the better I can hunt.
Yeah, it's, I just, I mean, I noticed that I was just at, I had a big advantage over people.
I could see people get fatigued if I was with somebody.
I could just, it was just different.
And I'm like, I learned that if the hardest thing you've ever done is that hunt, that's bad.
It's not good. You're going to, because you're going to, you'll fuck up so much.
You have to be on such, I mean, precision and making good decisions.
It's, you have to be at your very best.
So if you're fatigued or if you're thinking about home or of all these different things,
it's taken away from where your focus should be, you will fail.
And I just, I noticed that, or I realized I need to be at my very best, even at the end of a long hunt.
And how it made sense to me was that at the end of a long hunt, instead of being diminished,
you should be better because you're getting more dialed into the mountains.
You're understanding the animals and their habits.
You're getting more mountain tough.
And so if you weren't fatigued or have any of those things with, with, with time that comes in the mountains,
like the, where's on people? If that wasn't wearing on you?
By the end of the hunt, you're going to be at your very best.
And I killed a lot of animals at the very end of the hunt.
So, at one point, the Oregonian newspaper ran an article,
and the headline reads,
Bo Hunter beats Armstrong.
Yeah, tell us that story.
It's in the book, but give us a, give us a background on that one.
Yeah, I mean, I knew so Lance was retiring from the Tour de France,
and he had won seven straight.
It's that next year was, let me think.
I think that was in 2006. He ran the New York marathon.
And I'd been a big, big, Lance fan.
You know, this is what, before all the, whatever people want to say about PDs and all that.
It's before all that. So he was just like had overcome this,
and he was like a hero. He's still somebody I look up to,
because he was the best, the very best of what he did.
So he's running this marathon, the New York marathon,
and it's my first year running it.
It's kind of hard to get into. It's a big race.
And so I thought, well, I want to try to be the greatest endurance athlete of all time.
And so I ended up, I beat him there.
It was in 2006, and then we ran together, actually,
for half the race in Boston in 2008, and I beat him there, too.
Of course, it was like a one person, he didn't even know who I was.
So it wasn't like this is Kim Verselands head to head.
He was, you know, he is a superstar.
I was just something dude.
You know, it's like if LeBron James goes to open gym and somebody,
you know, somehow travels and gets some hook shot to go in.
They dominate in LeBron.
So it's kind of like that. He didn't know.
It's like beating someone at open mat,
or you're like someone passes your guard, open mat,
they're like, hey, you know, I crush chocolate past this car.
Yeah, I even know that we were, you know,
all of us have to have fun with Roman.
Right. So it, so I always the guy who passed your guard.
It lands with you.
And it somehow it makes the cover of the Oregon.
I know, your jockels guard gets past my phone.
Exactly.
It was so unjustified, but it's, I just, all I cared about was there
is that it just referred to me as bow hunter.
Yeah, that's badass.
But it reminds me of, you know, and everybody, everybody loves
a movie 300, but you remember what he was like,
we know what's your professional,
it's your professional, it's such a great part.
And then so I don't have a, that's what I do is bow hunter.
No, did you talk to him during those two races?
Didn't one of you ran with him for a while?
Yeah, you were like talking, right?
Right. Yeah, yeah.
Who knows if he'll remember?
I think we did sit in a book though.
But, but, oh, I was going to say, sir,
you're not connected now.
So, so, to do his podcast.
Okay, well, we've never talked about this.
Yeah.
Like me, he and I, but he's gonna make
I let you win.
I don't know, he'll be like, what?
I don't know who you are.
But what I remember, this could be a version.
You know how you can, you tell us something,
a story to yourself so many times.
It's like, it becomes, it never happened,
but it's like now it's like, I remember Roy told me this one
time, he's like, we went on this moose hunt.
And I've been like, yeah, I've never had actually never had a
shot at a moose.
And he's like, you, you blew it on a giant bull.
And I'm like, when?
He goes, remember on the river and the pouring rain?
And you hit low on that giant bull on the other side of the river?
And I was like, oh my god.
I had totally blocked that out of my memory.
I had, I had made this truth in my head
that I'd never shot at a moose.
No, I just didn't want to remember when I blew it.
I had definitely shot it on a moose.
So anyway, who knows if this last story is kind of like this?
But all I know is, we were running and I was running behind him.
And I was hurting this dying, like, third, my old 13 of the race.
And I remember, it was behind him, he had this gold single
and on, like, he always wore, because like, I called it the tour.
And I was looking at his calves and I was like,
God, he's probably just feels strong.
He's not tired at all enough fatigue.
And I was like, god, why can't I be an Olympic athlete?
You know, he made the Olympics too.
And I just thought he was probably just fresh as can be.
And I'm just this fucking 40 year old dad dying.
And I get up, I'm like, I'm going to go.
I don't care how bad this hurts.
I'm just, you know, burst into flames,
puke, throw up, collapse, who knows what's going to happen.
So I fight, fight, fight, takes me in a while and I get up beside him.
So we're running side by side.
And he goes, he looks over, probably because I was staring at him.
I'm gonna go, maybe I was touching his arm.
I don't know.
But he goes, he goes, is this heartbreak hill?
And I said no, and I said, yeah, I said it's still up here.
It's like, oh, fuck, I'm dying.
And I was just like, oh, I'm dying too.
But I didn't know you were dying.
So that gave me like a weird boost.
You know, this man God is dying.
And here, I'm a Raylor man,
and I'm dying, so it's like, okay, so we kept going,
keep going.
And he and up saying, hey, what's your pace today?
And I told him he's like, you met my,
who knows if this happened.
I think it did.
But, since you might have run with you,
and I'm like, no, it's like, yeah,
250.
So we ran together.
And yeah, it's like, shared a few words.
I remember people like,
LATS, what, 10,000 times.
I remember this one guy ran up by him.
And he's like, he was, I had to stick your
hands or two.
LATS is like, I mean, we're running this race.
And he's like, I don't even know how your social response.
You know, so it was just a weird,
but I was right there for all of this.
Anyway, we, I, I, I finished 12 seconds.
I think or something ahead of him in that race.
But we had this connection.
Yeah.
So so much of,
the older is why I'm maybe going to make it out.
So even though we're saying that it was the race
between you and him, but it was really only in your mind.
Yeah.
When someone starts pulling ahead of you in a run,
that's a thing.
Right.
So like, at some point, you had to start pulling ahead of it, right?
Yeah.
I mean, he had this, there's a motorcade around him.
Because the, the, the, the,
he leads finished.
Probably two, maybe 10 to 8 to 08.
And we were back at 250.
So, um, they had finished.
So then the story for the TV was Lance.
Because Lance was running Boston.
So there's like this motorcycle and had a camera on it and all the stuff.
And so yeah, there's some overhead shots and, and we were on TV.
And my wife, you know, I had told my boys, this is in the book too,
but I told my boys that, hey, I'm going to go to Boston and,
and, uh, I'm going to beat Lance Armstrong in the race.
Again, he last doesn't know anything about me.
But anyway, they thought I was like, you know, just talking out my ass.
They were, they were laugh and you can't beat Lance Armstrong.
Because they'd been a little oxygen in the TV forever.
And he was such a legend in the, in the tour, you know, he just, you know,
cocky and blew by people and just dominate and rubbed in their face.
And he's like, so it was like, you know, he had this, this thing about him.
And, and this aura.
So I said I was going to go back to run with him and then beat him at the end.
They laughed.
And so then on TV, I'm running with Lance Armstrong.
I have this camo top on that I cut the sleeves off of.
He's got always Nike gear.
And there I am.
And we're running.
And then so at the end of my quote, I told myself, I'm not going to
fucking run this whole way and not do what I said.
So I took off and it came across and for he had his own finish line.
So he had to go up, veer over to the right.
But there's why I think maybe I didn't make all of it up.
100% was because he finished and then he pointed at me.
I like I went over there and and we shook hands and said, you know,
good job.
So we had a heat whatever.
And they got a picture.
I can't remember if it's in the book or not.
But yeah, so I mean, it was for me.
Dude, that was, that was, that felt like I was almost athletic.
You know, that time I was like, this is this, it would be like winning a gold medal.
I thought.
So it was and you've got home and your kids were you told your kids.
Like, they saw it.
No, they saw it.
They saw it.
They were a lot.
Well, true was at home.
He's watching.
And then here's how big a deal lasts.
It's time they announced it on the school intercom that Tanner and
true is dad beat Lance Armstrong in the Boston Maritime.
So, you know, Eugene is known as a running capital of the world.
You know, we had the Olympic, the Olympic trials there all the time.
So running is kind of a big thing there.
So to have and everybody knows Boston, everybody knows Lance.
So it's like his perfect storm.
But for me, it was after.
Where do you record him with him?
I don't know.
We have to schedule it.
Okay.
So I was going to say if you get this podcast out.
Hopefully you won't hear this one before he gets you.
Because otherwise, I don't know.
You either I'll be ready for you.
I know.
He'll be like, no.
Yeah.
That did not happen.
I.
All right.
So speaking of running.
Here we go with over 17,000 feet of elevation gain.
The big horn 100 was one of the toughest 100 mile foot races in the United States.
It would be my first ultra over 50 miles.
The previous year at the big horn 50, I finished third overall.
It would be my first race where I would be required to run through the night.
My wife was having second thoughts and tried to persuade me to reconsider.
You said I've already done a 50 mile.
And my goal is to find out exactly what I can do to find where's my breaking point.
So at this point, you've done some 50 miles.
And now you're going for the hundo.
Yeah, because in the ultra marathon world, it's until you do a hundred.
It doesn't even.
It's like, I don't know.
They don't even really count it.
You know, like the 50 K, which is 32 miles or the 50 mile.
It's like, well, have you done a hundred yet?
So that's like the barrier of entry for the old.
Yeah.
And I had.
So that was my first one.
And you say the big one 100 is an out and back run consisting of 76 miles of single track
and 60 miles of rugged double track cheap trail and eight miles of gravel road with 17,500 feet of climbing,
18,000 feet of descent.
So I looked at the map of this.
I went online.
It looked like.
So it sort of looks like you're going up and down mountains the whole time.
Are you going on a ridge line or something?
But what is it?
Are you an out of mountains?
No, you're.
So it starts.
You start pretty high.
And then you go, you go up to the 9,000 feet, then you stay on the ridge, then you drop all the way down to maybe 6,000 feet.
And then you climb back at the 48 mile mark as a turnaround.
And that climbs from 6,000 back up to about almost 10,000 probably 9 something.
Let's a gradual climb up and then you reverse and come back.
That's what struck me.
It's very sucky when I looked at it because I was like, oh, you know, it kind of looks like,
because they have a profile shot.
Yeah.
And they kind of just show you the elevation.
And it's up down.
It's basically up down up down up down down down down down down kind of descending.
Right.
Up down up down up.
You're kind of slowly descending.
And then I read your book and I was like, oh, and there's a turn around.
So you go up down up down up down up down up down up down up down.
And you're kind of descending.
And then it's up down up down up down up.
But going back up.
Yeah, that there's a grind from I remember this specifically from I think 60 something to 82.
And so hard.
It was so just it was up the whole way and it started to get hot.
And it's like you've been running all night.
And you said, even 20 miles into it, you borrowed a camel back from somebody.
You got that thing wearing holes into your back.
It did.
It.
I never trained with it.
And you went out of the gate like pre-fond team.
Just go out.
And hard as a good.
What else is like the 800 meter back in middle school?
Yeah, it was. Yeah.
And I thought I was going to get it the turn around quicker.
So I didn't have a headlamp because I thought it was going to be there.
I had my head.
Here's what I'm going to do.
I'll get here at, you know, whatever it right when it's starting to get dark.
But I didn't get there till about 11.
12 hours into the race.
And so it'd been dark for a couple hours.
So I'm up in the snow.
There's snow up there at the turn around.
And pulse tolling through the snow with no light.
And I get to the turn around and I'm like, oh my God.
This is brutal.
So that was my first one.
That is 48 miles down at 52 left.
You say in here that that 48 miles turn around.
The porcupine aid station is real convenient spot for DNFers.
That was the official notation on the race results for runners who quit.
DNF did not finish.
I saw guys at porcupine.
Tough guys, obviously.
I mean, hell, to get there.
They just ran 48 miles to the last 18 uphill to the tune of a 4500 foot gain.
Looking like they were on their deathbed.
Raptain Blankets being attended by Medix.
It was at porcupine that many called it a race.
Yes, he having been in the military for a long time.
Or I was in the military for a long time.
And we would be going out on patrols.
And you pay really close attention to how much elevation you're doing.
You're going to gain or lose.
You know, you're doing a map study.
You're looking at the contour lines.
Like you're figuring out.
So when you say 4500 feet gain or a total of 18,000.
That's a socks.
Yeah.
And that's what makes.
It's not just the distance.
It's a terrain too.
And on trail also your body's like correcting all the time.
You know, like on road, you'll see some elite marathoners.
And they don't even have abs.
You know, they kind of almost got a little pot belly because you can get so efficient
at running on a road.
In the mountains, you are correcting all your cores like getting taxed.
Your quasi-gating tax is a whole different type of running.
But it's taxing.
What are you carrying on you?
You got to take some water.
Usually in some calories.
So that's it.
Yeah.
You get to, you were trying to do it in how long?
24 hours?
Yeah.
That's always the goal if you can break 24 hours and a hundred by
or you're slid you it.
You're legit.
At 12 p.m., I topped out at mile 82.
How is that 25 hours now?
It's not under 24.
And I still had 18 miles.
Let's do it.
By 3.10 p.m., I reached the last state station in mile 95.
When I got to mile 95, Tanner was there waiting for me and ran the last five
with his old man.
That boy, I told him I couldn't stop because of my knee.
And to said, we had an hour and 50 minutes to run five miles.
Yeah, I wanted to definitely want to get in under 30 hours.
Right.
But 29.
And was Tanner just like, I mean, you can run, you can run five miles in 30 minutes.
Yeah, I mean, he was I think 14 at the time.
And I kind of took him just kind of, you know, how we talked about
we always turned it justify.
And so I'm like, well, my son's there.
It's like I'm not really himself.
So he had to stay in the hotel by himself for a whole day, 29 hours.
I had someone to give him a ride to that aid station to go to the last five.
And he didn't really want to do five.
So, but I was going pretty slow at that time.
At 420 p.m. a hundred miles, we're in the books official time 29 hours, 20 minutes.
I was a hundred mile ultra marathoner.
I earned my first hundred mile belt buckle.
Yeah, that's what you get instead of a medal or a trophy or anything.
You did usually have belt buckle.
Is that just like outwester, is that everywhere?
Uh, I don't know. Maybe out. I'm not sure.
Hmm.
Yeah.
Check.
Hundred miles.
Fast forward a little bit here.
You say, in the final year of my dad's life, he reminded me once again how much I respected and admired him.
From the moment doctors discovered a lump on his liver, Bob Haines began his fight with cancer.
It was an aggressive form of cancer, but he never gave up.
For 18 months, he waged a war against it.
I'm going to beat it. He told me, everybody who gets cancer says this and sometimes they do.
So, your dad comes down with with liver cancer.
Um, you, you, you talk about that and here and as you're talking about that,
you still are working your job, you're still being a dad and you're still training and you're still running.
Hmm.
Then you have a goal and you say the most coveted award in the Ultraman Marathoning World is the silver buckle awarded
at the Western States and Durans run.
It's the most famous 100 mile race in the world because of a history and competitiveness.
I earned my buckle in my second 100 mile by finishing in under 24 hours at 22 hours and 41 minutes.
In my world, if there was ever a comparison to an Olympic gold medal, it would be this silver buckle.
So, you're going to go for this thing.
On the drive down to where the race started in Olympic Valley, California, I talked to my dad on the phone and he didn't sound good.
He'd been battling cancer for cancer for a year and a half.
So, I knew in my heart he was nearing the end of his fight.
As I ran, I took some solace and knowing he was following my progress live on the WS100.com website.
At 341 AM, I crossed the finish line in Auburn, California and in doing so earned my silver Western States buckle.
I just logged in nearly seven hour improvement over my first 100 mile race.
I started out the race supremely confident during those 22 hours and 41 minutes of reflection while running doubt-crept in more than once.
Through those struggles, I kept telling myself that my pain was temporary.
In a few days time, I would be healed up and richer from the experience.
For my dad, there would be no healing.
There would be, there would only be deeper and more debilitating pain and sickness than death.
I finished the race that Sunday morning.
We drove home that day, getting home very late.
I went to work the next day.
I will never forget looking into dad's eyes upon my return from the race and saying, Dad,
I wish I could give you some of my strength. Don't give up on me yet. He told me.
He still thought he was going to beat it.
I will never forget his will to live.
A handful of days after I earned my silver buckle in the Western States race,
my dad passed on early in the day on July 5th.
The pain of losing him was much worse than any had felt before from the race's life or anything.
I was a bit of a hard time.
It was like a big transition because on July 4th every year,
there's the butebutin K and Eugene.
My dad has how he lived with my stepmom candy pretty close to the course.
They would walk down to Dairy Mart and we would be doing the 10 K and run by him every time, every year forever.
I'm running that day, July 4th, 2010.
The day before he died and I was getting up there by Dairy Mart, no dad.
He never missed.
It's like I said, running this so important, the biggest race in Eugene.
It was, I mean, I knew, but people with cancer, it's always this thing.
No one quite if you people haven't, everybody's going to beat it and you just know.
It's heartbreaking because they're not going to beat it.
The chemo is going to, you know, it can take the chemo so long so the cancer is held back for a while,
but then once you stop the chemo because your body can't take it, then the cancer comes back.
Harder and it's like everybody kind of knows the routine, but nobody wants to talk about it.
But I knew. And so then not seeing him there that day and then he died that early in the morning at July 5th.
And how did he go over there and, you know, it was just a, you know,
when somebody dies at the house like he did, you have to have the funeral home or whoever come over.
So he comes over and he's by himself.
And my dad's room is upstairs and he's like, I said, how are you?
How are you getting them down? He's like, well, could you help me?
And so we had to put him in a bag and had to help carry him out.
And it's like, I don't know, it's one of those, he's never forget, never forget that.
And so it's just death, this journey, you know, your dad not being around.
And it's like, it makes all the other, like I say in there, the physical pain, just seem like nothing to me.
What did your dad think about the, the freaking hundred mile races?
Because those weren't really around when your dad was running.
No, he probably, I mean, he would act like he cared,
but, you know, he was more of a Olympic event person,
Poverty, high-jump, running.
You know, the altars are kind of like the kind of a weird offshoot of that, you know.
So he's probably like, well, for he probably think it was better than Bohani,
because he'd never hunted, he's just an athlete his whole life, so he would say,
you know, when I kill an animal, I'd lose brain cells.
So he was like pretty liberal, South-E-Gee's a pretty liberal school and you gene.
And he was track coach there forever, so he never got the hunting part,
but he, you know, so the altars are probably a little better than hunting.
He gets to celebrate those little more, but still not quite as good as, you know, real track.
I don't think like dads are ever impressed by anything.
You know, they're always just like, well, you know.
That's a tough crowd.
Yeah, I remember I was a lathe who I wrote extreme ownership with,
and we made the New York Times bestseller list, right?
And so I called my parents, I was like, hey, you know,
and lathe, lathe remembers this because I had him on speaker,
as I came, I just found out we made the New York Times bestseller list.
And my mom was like, well, it really, what really counts is how long
stay on their phone.
I was like, good boy.
Yeah, I was like, cool, later.
Yeah, good boy.
Yeah, I was like, cool, yeah, my boss, you know.
Sorry about that.
Yeah, I just wanted to taste that thing.
I just wanted to taste that thing.
I was like, the very bottom of this tasted.
Dude, one minute, I'm going to go on records saying,
if your book doesn't, you book out, they'll make it.
I'm going on record as saying, it will make it.
It will make it.
Dude, if the freaking, the tour you're doing right now,
yeah, it will make it.
Yeah, it will make it.
Yeah.
Yeah, and they're, you know, it's not based on sales.
It's based on whatever their weird voodoo is.
Yeah.
It'd be the upset of the century if it makes it.
Well, you know, you know, Jordan Peterson's book,
12 rules for life if you ever heard of that.
Yeah, it's literally the biggest selling book in the past.
I don't know how long.
Yeah, it didn't make it.
So that is, yeah.
I don't know.
Yeah, they got their own little.
They got their own things they're promoting over there.
Yeah.
Anyways, going back to this book, you got a whole section in here on a bunch of people.
Courtney, how do you say her last name?
The Walter.
You got Courtney DeWalter, Michael Chandler,
Connor McGregor, Connor McGregor, David Goggins.
You talk about Jordan, Kobe, Brady, Tiger, Steve from Prefonte.
You just got a bunch of awesome freaking athletes and studs that you talk about,
kind of what you take away from all of them.
So that was a pretty cool section.
And then like you said, you've gotten to meet all these people and
freaking hang out with them.
Yeah.
Did you meet Tiger?
No, no.
No, and not, I just like their minds.
Yeah, well, Jordan, Kobe, Brady and
Oh, they'll you exchange some, like, social media with Brady with Brady.
Yeah.
And I have talked to Connor before, but all I ever said to Connor was,
this is kind of he's on his come up.
And he was like really taken off.
And he was sitting there.
I was, you know, Joe had the hook up for the seats.
You know, God bless, Joe and UFC.
But so Connor was sitting there with his girlfriend.
And I go over there and I just said, I go,
I said, how have you ever lost?
Because he had two, he has two had two losses at this time.
Yeah.
He was, I think he's cage warriors or whatever over there.
And then came up and it was on a pretty good tear in the UFC.
But I was like, he has two losses.
And I said, how have you ever lost?
Because you see him on beatable right now.
And he's like, well, just young, just wasn't that good.
So anyway, that was only time I've had a big change towards with him.
But yeah, I never met Kobe, but I took a lot and Jordan, I have him at him.
But that mindset, you know, the winning mindset, everybody can take something from those guys.
Yeah.
How good was that documentary the last dance?
Oh my God, I loved it.
I loved it.
Yeah.
Speaking of dads, you know how well, like, dads never listen anything that you say.
Right.
So my dad's a sports fanatic.
A sports fanatic.
And I go, hey, you should really watch this thing in the last dance.
I don't know.
I can't get him to watch it.
I still have his little watch to.
He's a one person in the world.
Yeah.
Who is a basketball fanatic to coach the basketball.
Back as you brought it up.
Referee basketball.
And I said, hey, hey, dad, this is probably like the coolest thing that's ever been made about basketball from a media perspective.
Yeah.
You should really watch it.
You will really enjoy it.
Yeah.
You should have told him not to watch it.
I should have told him it was stupid.
Yeah.
I know.
They did a such a good job.
And Jordan's mindset.
Oh my God.
How do you know, I love when he's like getting on the guys.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
All those.
And then the next, see, I grew up.
And you probably get well, see.
You're older than me.
But by the time Jordan's time was here, I was already in the military.
So I wasn't tracking as hard as I was as I was in the 80s, right?
When it was, you know, the Celtics and the Lakers and me being from New England, it was like Celtics, 100% all day long.
And Larry Bird is like a god.
Oh, yeah.
And then you have Larry Bird because Larry Bird's attitude is savage, similar.
And, you know, the thing that they say about Bird,
and they say this and you can go back and forth and whatever.
But, you know, that Bird wasn't as athletic as a lot of players in the NBA, but he was just such a hard worker that he was just going to outwork you.
Right.
And that's what he was going to do.
So my mindset was always like, I'm just going to have to work harder.
Yeah.
Like Bird.
Like, and that, you know, my dad, when I played basketball, if I didn't come home with like, skinned knees from diving on the floor,
Yeah.
That was like a fail.
Right.
Exactly.
Well, yeah, me and Tanner, Tanner was a basketball player.
And he, we had so many battles because I was probably like your dad.
And I would just be like, piss the whole time watching a play.
He would score 32 and a half one game.
And I'm like, I'm like, you're not even playing defense.
You know, yeah.
I go, you're not, you're not getting, I said, as soon as I ball leaves our hand from whoever you're guarding,
it has to go all the way to the floor and all the way back into the hand during that time.
Why don't you dive on it?
So then he finally, like, years later now, he watched some old tapes from high school.
And he's like, God, daddy, because I can't believe how lazy I was in defense.
And I'm like, no shit.
We had so many fights about it.
Yeah.
I sucked, by the way, I noticed that.
No, everyone.
I sucked at basketball.
I wasn't hostile to the, I was just hostile.
I would steal.
You know, I'd play, I would play D.
Yeah.
Well, that Larry Bird gave white guys hope.
But what people, what most people skip over is he was also like, what six, six, nine.
Nine?
Yeah.
So it's not like just a little white guy.
He could shoot better than anybody.
Yeah.
He was a beast.
So you got that cool chapter.
You're kind of talking about what you take away from all those, all those badass individuals.
Then you got a section to hear this, this beast mode.
There are no rest days.
As irrational as it may seem in my mind, I'm not good enough to take a day off and I never will be running training and bow shooting have always been a therapy of sorts for me.
What I call my lift, run shoot lifestyle is a means to an end.
And that end is hunting.
Preparation is key to achieve any goal.
You cannot fall back on luck or talent.
Those will leave you empty handed every time.
You kind of made this point earlier and I knew this part was coming.
Like you can theoretically not be in good shape and go out and you can kill a bull.
It can happen.
Yeah.
And I've heard stories from guides telling me that there are people that show up to hunt that they really haven't really even cited in their bow yet.
I know.
I couldn't imagine being a guide.
I would hate to be like, I don't know how they just don't be like, what are you what in the hell is going on?
Because also to me, it's like it shows respect to the animal when you show it prepared.
You know, when you're not prepared, you're shooting an arrow.
You can hit it in the guts, you hit in the ass, hit it in the wherever.
It's like you don't care about that in almost life so literal or whatever.
I worded that wrong.
But I mean, it's so insignificant.
You can't prepare for this hunt.
That to me, I don't like that.
Um, yeah.
And then what you're saying, like, let's another underlying theme in your book is like,
Sure, you can theoretically do that.
But if you everything that you can do to be a little bit more prepared is going to just up your odds a little bit.
Yeah.
Well, I would always think that I've always thought about things and percentages and numbers.
And I'd always think even in basketball, so you could go back because I played all these sports.
But you know, try to get this to my kids and whatever.
But it's like the, the, so you're in better shape.
So your reaction time is probably a little quicker.
So if you can get and it might just be one finger hits that ball that that slows that ball down enough for the next guy down the line to where that passes.
Going, the ball's going slower.
So they could get to the ball, knock a loose, kick it to you.
You could score whatever.
All, and that started with the finger tip, which started with preparation, which started with the reaction time.
So it's like, I'd always say, you can't measure some of this stuff with these big, big factors and big numbers.
But it's percentage wise, even if it's a tenth of a percent, that adds up.
So the more I can do to add those percentages,
I'm just going to be that much better.
Yeah, that one tenth of a percent, that might be the one tenth of a percent that means a different success or failure.
Yeah, because also I've thought about this in terms of hunting, where if that broad head blade.
So I should have a poundage also when people want to criticize this.
You don't need to shoot 90 pounds or whatever.
So I'm always thinking like if that animal reacts and it's spinning when that arrow hits.
And because that force that arrow is greater, where instead of kicking off the bone and going, say, to the right, it pushes through the bone.
Get some more penetration.
And maybe catch is that one artery with one blade.
And that one blade cutting that artery because you have higher poundage and you're more prepared and you've got that arrow more where you wanted it to.
That artery would drip a blood that maybe you lost blood.
And then you found the one drop that led you the direction where the new found the animal or more blood.
But it was that one drop that did that.
What caused that extra drop of blood, which can make all the difference in the world.
And it's like you can't tell me all the shit I think about and all the work I put in doesn't make a difference.
Because you can't tell me that that's not an immeasurable.
Yeah.
That's that's a difference.
I was shocked the first time I was following a blood trail.
I was with Dudley.
You are literally looking for blood.
That is a size of a actually smaller than the size of a pinhead.
Yeah.
I was like holy shit.
Like I'm following Dudley and he's walking all the sudden he's like right here because I'm following because I don't know what the hell I'm doing.
You know what we find. He's like right here and I got to get up and basically get on my knees and go oh yeah I see it.
Yeah.
Freaking skills.
And that's another you know when I was talking earlier about all the different skills that come into play.
That's just a shoot it.
Because once you shoot it it you got to go find it.
And there's a whole another incredible skill set that comes into play there.
Yeah.
And sometimes it's not even blood.
Sometimes it could just be right fluid.
Like if you hit back and maybe you hit guts that's not going to bleed.
There's not a lot of blood in the guts.
So but it might just be clear fluid.
So it's not even a red drop of blood but you're like hey you're looking at you know kind of doing a little autopsy.
You got to know you're like what you smell it.
Do you the texture then that leads you to blood.
But yeah it's a lot to a freaking hard game.
Yeah. You say I'm not even the best bow shot.
But I want to be there are guys in my hometown pro shop the bow rack.
Yeah.
That are better shots than me but I do work very hard at it.
The key to my success is to throw hard work at everything I do.
I can't scout elk every day.
So I lift, run and shoot.
Yeah.
I just like feel like that's moving that needle on the right direction.
You got a story in here that is really just lays all this out.
Going back to the book, do I deserve to be here?
I dreamt of hunting the sand Carlos Apache Indian reservation for decades.
Located in southeastern Arizona and encompassing 8.8 million acres of land.
Sand Carlos produces what I believe are the most amazing elk in the world.
The reservation allocates only a handful of tags each year because the densities are low and they manage this country for trophy bowls.
This means to hunt there is very expensive.
Altogether, I want like that cost uport of $70,000, which is more than I've made annually for nearly all of my life.
Compare that to the tag for my first out-of-state elk hunt in Wyoming, which costs $1100 bucks.
Nobody wants to have to right-to-check that big and have nothing to show for it.
So there's a lot riding on me making the perfect shot.
Bo hunting, the biggest, most coveted elk in the world adds to this pressure.
You can't stop thinking about all you've sacrificed and the years you've worked to pay for this opportunity
to me that money essentially could affect the quality of life provided for my family.
All this stuff starts weighing on you.
That was why I kept wondering whether I deserved the honor to be at Sand Carlos.
One of the many incredible hunting opportunities I've been blessed with over the years.
I felt like I didn't belong or didn't really deserve the chance.
I'm not sure why this is, but I know this perspective keeps me focusing on capitalizing and being appreciative of the experience.
My goal was to live up to the expectations of being respectful, bow hunter,
and celebrating these special elk mountains appropriately.
Two words that come to mind are the ones Maximus says at the start of the battle in gladiator.
Strength and honor.
Bow hunters need to be strong mentally and physically, but they also need to show honor.
Honor is to me, the attribute that makes bow hunting so special.
So this is talk about like, what, for someone that doesn't understand hunting,
what does it mean to go into this Indian reservation where they have limited number of elk.
Their trophy elk, which means their monsters.
And they can only allow so many people to hunt.
And because they can only allow so many people to hunt and because the elk are so monstrous, they are going to charge money for it.
Yeah, it's a supply and demand.
This place, like years, like 20 years ago there'd be a VHS tape out and say, you know, giant bulls of Santa Carlos.
We used to watch it at the bow rack.
And these bulls seem surreal how big they were.
And then the same species from the elk that we've we'd hunt, you know, giant bulls, 400 inch of owl, which is huge.
So this was like a legendary place.
And then because of the money, that eliminates a lot of people.
Pretty much everybody.
Pretty much everyone.
But the thing with there, it takes more than money because there's a lot of guys with money.
A lot of dickheads with money.
The tribe is going to deal with a bunch of dickheads.
They don't have to because they have the biggest bulls in the world.
So I remember this guy sent me this message a while ago and he said, you know, how do you get to hunt Santa Carlos?
I sent an email and I guess my 20 thousand dollars isn't enough for them.
You know, I'm like, why can't I already tell you're probably just a dumb fuck?
You know, so he could have, you know, offer a million.
They should probably not get a chance to hunt there because they're not going to deal with that.
So you have to be respectful, which I'm always respectful, but also I value what it means to hunt there.
And then also of sacrifice a lot to build and have that money.
And then still that wasn't enough.
Still it took.
And then he came up.
Folks is who got me the first opportunity there and he had hunted there one year and they could tell what type of guy he was.
He cared he's trying to do his best.
He didn't have the greatest hunt, but he paid his dues and put it in the time there.
And then this other tag came open and said, well, I've got a guy, you know, Cam.
I think, you know, if we could give him an opportunity here, I'll think you'll buy that tag.
what happened.
But it takes more than just money.
It takes a lot of things come in.
And Kipfokx just for a little intro,
he's one of the founders of Under Armor.
And well, he was freaking college athlete
stud, his damn self, playing lacrosse.
And then really was a huge part of the driving force
but behind the operations at Under Armor.
And then was the driving force between behind the Under Armor
and the front, yep, stuff.
And now he's one of the driving forces behind the
origin hunt FYI.
Yeah.
He's definitely found that's his niche.
And he's such a hard worker and he cares about it.
He cares about for whatever reason.
That apparel that just building clothing,
is like his jam.
He loves it.
Yeah.
So you say this here, Kipfokx, one of the original founders
of Under Armor in a good friend of mine was there with me.
And he was the one who had given me this opportunity
at San Carlos as I headed out to the best elk country
in the world for two solid weeks.
If need be, I was confident.
But to think I'd even get a chance at a once in a lifetime
bull like this seemed completely far fetched.
So you're out.
They identified, do they?
They tell you, hey, we got a bull here that you might be,
because they're scouting bulls all the time.
Yeah.
And they find a 400-inch bull.
What if that's their estimation?
It's a 10 by 9.
Yeah.
That was crazy.
That's insane.
That was, yeah.
And you nickname or they nickname the bull type bull,
because you have like a narrow rack with 10 by 9, but narrow.
So again, you go through some of the details here.
I'm going to pick it up.
You got a guide name, Chris.
Chris and Kip were behind me over a little spine
ridge about 40 yards away.
All good so far.
The still unseen bull screamed a bugle.
And by the way, right now, go on to YouTube and Google,
bull, elk, bugling and crank up the volume and then press play.
Yeah.
Because it is freaking primal insanity.
You hear those things going off?
It is.
So the still unseen bull screamed a bugle.
He was close.
I estimated where he'd come out of the timber
and looked for shooting lanes.
It was a mess.
The burn had burnt trees and brush everywhere.
I got nervous that once he entered the burn,
I wouldn't have a clear shot.
I had seconds to make a decisions.
At the moment of truth, a bow hunter makes certain decisions
that impact success or failure.
The line between the two is razor thin.
I glanced at the tree.
I was leaning against a notice some good limbs to climb.
I quickly surmised that I'd increase my potential shot opportunities
if I climbed up the tree.
Since I had been set up on the shady side of the tree,
my movement would be much less noticeable in the shadows.
Scaling the tree is quickly as I could.
I climbed 10 to 15 feet up in the air and set up to shoot.
This elevated position opened to my shooting lanes greatly.
Seconds after getting set in the tree,
the bull ripped the bugle, answering Chris and exposing himself.
It was tight bull 30 yards away.
While we were in his country, we had no idea he was the bull coming in.
I took one quick look at his 400 inch 10 by 9 rack,
recognized what bull he was and directed my focus
on getting a good arrow in him.
Chris cow called the tight and tight bull closed in,
heading straight toward me and ultimately stopped directly underneath me.
I slowly eased my bow back.
The bull noticed movement or sensed or heard me
probably thinking mountain lion if you could vast him
and he became spooked running back toward the timber.
He stopped at just under 30 yards,
quartering away as I frantically tried to get position to shoot
while balancing on a burt tree limb 15 feet up.
When tight bull stood, staring back at me,
trying to piece together what was happening.
I had to act fast.
My sight was set on 30 yards, which would work.
So I quickly re-adjusted while trying to stay calm.
I settled my sight pin on his vitals,
but there was one small limb covering his chest
so I raised up on my tiptoes in the tree and picked a spot.
It was crunch time.
For a bow hunter, this is the most critical moment to master
as adrenaline speeds through your body and your heart races.
If you can't remain under control, success will be tough.
If you can, releasing a perfect arrow
is just another part of the process.
If you put in the work, you'll crave crunch time
because it's your chance to shine.
Bend that bow back anchor in, pick a spot,
and send a razor sharp broad head on its way.
The arrow flashes toward the bull and lands home
as you knew it would because you've worked too hard to fail.
After following a short blood trail, you find your bull
and respectfully kneel by the amazing animal
that gave its life to you.
The bull's memory would be celebrated
when his antlers eventually adorned your wall
and his flesh nourished you.
I quickly let an arrow go toward the biggest bull I'd ever seen.
I felt confident in the shot on release,
confident about the work I put in,
confident the arrow would strike where I'd visualized it would perfect.
But that's not what happened.
The arrow flew off the mark hitting the bull,
high into the right striking the top of his shoulder blade.
A high 24, far-forward shot is about the worst shot
you can make on a big bull since it's high and forward
of the lungs, which is where you want the arrow to hit.
The bull is protected by heavy muscle and bone,
so an arrow that strikes here will typically only wound the bull
and not cause death.
I felt sick to my stomach as a ran over the ridge
with what looked like half my arrow sticking out of his shoulder.
How did I blow an opportunity I'd worked my entire adult life
preparing for?
My dream became a nightmare in the fraction of a second.
It took my arrow to leave my bull and hit the bull.
That was rough.
That is a savage game right there.
Yeah, I mean, so it was 30 yards away.
Yeah, just under 30.
I feel like if I needed to like place a bet with my own life,
then you hitting a target at 30 yards,
I'd feel so comfortable when you take a shot.
I mean, this is what you do.
This is what you live for.
Yeah.
And that's what makes this freaking this game so crazy.
Yeah, it's so tough.
Being up in the tree was a different,
had some different factors in it.
Having that limb come across where,
you don't, you're the sight that you're looking at,
the line of sight you're looking at,
your arrow is below that.
So trying to figure out where your arrow is,
and this is going to cross into your line of sight,
and then hit the animal.
It's going to cross into your line of sight,
go above your line of sight and draw.
And then because I've learned that before,
where I've hit tree branches that were above my line of sight,
exactly.
So trying to anticipate that,
because I didn't know that bull was going to come underneath me,
and then spook and be there and have that limb there.
And I didn't know any of that was happening.
So having to try to calculate all that in the heat of the moment,
as a bull stand in there,
you know, nostrils flare and eyes wide,
figuring out, thought it's just going to get jumped on by a lion.
And I'm like, here's the bull.
This is a bull we've been looking for,
the tight bull, the 10 by 9, the 400 inches is it.
And then you do the best you can,
and I screwed up.
It just, it wasn't my best shot.
And with all those factors in there,
is that did I do the best of those options?
Maybe, but it didn't help us,
because Arrow was the arrow ended up going in,
breaking off, and then I had 13 inches of arrow that had,
where broke off, there's a little blood on the shaft.
So 13 inches.
And, you know,
the last thing you want to do there,
when you're getting to once in a lifetime opportunity,
it's your first opportunity there,
the hunt that country is woundable.
Because on a hunt like that,
and any hunt, even at, you know,
like where you've been and you taught,
if you draw blood, no matter where you hit the animal,
that's your animal.
So, if I wound this bull,
and even if it doesn't die,
I'm paying for it.
70 grand.
So you end you wounded the animal.
I mean, the worst, because I put money aside,
I put that much pressure on myself anyway.
This is what I do.
It's what I've geared my whole life for.
So, even if it was $1 or $7 million,
I wouldn't have any more pressure.
It's still like, all this is my purpose.
But the money, when you're thinking about your family
and the sacrifices they've made for this,
then that just makes a worse.
And just so everybody knows,
elk are not human beings, obviously.
But if the reason I say that is because
they're so freaking tough.
Yes.
Like you put a 13, you put a broad head into a human being.
13 inches, they're gonna die.
Yeah.
Like anywhere in their torso,
they're gonna freak and die.
Right.
Especially what I mean, maybe if you get a massage or something.
But elk, they're crazy.
They're gonna be tough.
What they can survive.
Yeah.
No.
I mean, imagine how tough you would be if you slept outside for 365 days a year
on rock and dirt and weather.
Yeah.
And then in order to get a girlfriend,
you had to freaking go and ram heads fight
like a bunch of other dudes that had giant
spears coming out of their head.
Right.
So it's like they're built for that.
They're built to endure whatever.
And arrow, if it's not perfect.
Yeah.
It's gonna wound them.
They're, it's probably gonna, I don't know how they feel pain,
but they're gonna, they can get a long way.
They can go long ways survive a long time.
And they get stabbed with, yeah,
failures.
Yeah.
They get stabbed with antlers.
So this is sort of like a bad antler wound.
But that's what they deal with.
That's what they can actually cleaner.
You know, like I said.
So the right head is a cleaner cut.
And you know, you know how a clean cut can heal.
Right.
You know, so a puncture is,
is one of the worst things you can get for an injury.
So an antler puncturing.
Yeah.
I mean, they could overcome a point as they could overcome an arrow wound.
And they do all the time.
Yeah.
Going back to the book,
the type bowl was a regal animal I respected greatly,
but I failed to deliver the perfect shot.
I fucked up the shot from less than 30 yards.
I climbed down the burnt tree and slipped off my boots with just socks on my feet
and not hard-sold boots.
I could feel the ground better, which would allow me to sneak forward silently
and see what kind of blood I had to track.
As I followed the sparse blood trail,
my fears were confirmed.
The bull didn't bleed much at all a few drops,
which is what you'd expect given that shitty shot.
Eventually, the light blood trail stopped all together.
I was devastated, not only did I let myself down
and my family and friends and followers,
but I felt like I let the Apache tribe down as well.
This bull was so unique and so incredible
and I had made a poor shot on him.
He deserved better.
Now I had to go and tell the head of hunting for the tribe
that I had made a poor shot.
Kip, Chris and I hiked miles back to the truck.
Nobody said much.
I shook my head and started at the stairs at the ground.
I pit my stomach.
Yeah.
It's a bad feeling.
Dude.
This is like,
about hands are sweating right now.
Yeah.
You know, and like I said, I mean, obviously,
I'm like a complete amateur in this game,
but even when I put myself into your shoes as much of a perfectionist as you are,
and as much as I know you want to get the good shot
and then hear you are.
That's what I could say about being in the camps that I've been in.
Everybody knows exactly what just happened.
Like everyone knows there's no hiding.
Yeah.
It's just a, you know, you want to make a good shot.
You want to do your job, essentially.
And your job is to be,
build a vermursifl kill of the target animal.
So anything other than doing your job is tough,
especially in that circumstance.
Yeah, that's my first opportunity to show
you know what I was capable of in that environment in front of that,
the tribe and,
had been feel good.
I want to freaking rough game.
Yeah.
Yeah, I remember the first, the first time I shot a bowl,
I shot a shitty shot.
Heated in the leg,
luckily hit an artery,
but,
you know,
Dudley and I attracted until dark.
We still didn't find it.
We're walking back.
I mean, I just, I feel absolutely like,
horrible and I feel like horrible because I wounded this animal.
I feel horrible because I let Dudley down,
who like invested time and effort into me to,
to give me this opportunity to do this.
And on top of that quite frankly,
I didn't even understand that this happened.
I thought I was like the only person
that this had ever happened.
And that's why when I got back to camp,
I sat down with you and Dudley and Joe
and we're kind of sitting there eating.
And you must have just looked at my face.
It felt like you better like helped me.
Well,
because, and you basically told me like a couple stories
and you were like, hey man, you know, like, this happens.
And you know,
and it does.
And you know, you talked to the guides up there
and it's, you know,
there's a decent, it's hard to kill an elk with one shot
and it happens instantly.
That's a tough shot.
Yeah.
It's like one of those things though that,
nobody wants to talk about really,
but it does happen.
And it's like, you know,
mean Roy, we'd call each other on the phone
and it'd be like, how the hunt go, did you kill?
There's only one of two answers.
Nobody gives a shit about anything else
than yes or no.
So, in a, in a hunting camp setting like that,
yes, it happens.
But like, I know how the guides talk
and how just, not there specifically,
but just anywhere.
And it's like how that would be summed up
would be like, you know,
camp wounded.
Nobody needs anything else,
doesn't fucking matter.
Did you kill?
No, you wounded.
Yeah.
That all that you can justify,
you can explain,
it doesn't matter.
So it's like, just summed up,
like no matter how, how people talk
or make you feel better or whatever.
It doesn't really help.
And that's why this, this game is,
is freaking challenging.
Yeah.
And, but here's the thing,
that's why it's so rewarding.
Yeah.
You know, and so I,
I probably sound pretty negative right now
because it is hard as hell,
but that's what makes it so rewarding.
Yeah.
That's what makes it so awesome.
When you pull it off and you get it done.
So.
Yeah.
Ah.
Going back to the book here.
Before we're going to bed that night,
Kippin' I talked about typo,
what do you think the odds are
that we're going to get him,
Kippin' past 20% I said.
It's not good.
A high shoulder shot on a big bull,
like that, I fucked up.
Well, shit, he muttered.
I had a hard time sleeping even for a second
that night,
and it wasn't the first time.
I've had heartbreak in the mountains.
I remember more than once
blowing it on a big bull,
times when I should have gotten a kill
and screwed it up.
And it has haunted me.
Crushed me.
The next morning we got up and headed out
at first light to where I hit the tight bull.
Mark and Dan Stevens, Chris's uncle,
and cousin joined us to lend a hand
if need be.
We all walked to a ridge line
a mile or more away from where I had shot the bull.
As I scanned across the canyon with my optics,
I spotted something that I couldn't make out.
What am I looking at?
I asked the guys,
by those yellow quaking asspins
to the bottom left of them.
What am I seeing?
That's your bull, Chris said.
He was bedded.
I studied intently through my binos
and I didn't see a move.
Is he dead?
I asked Chris Cow called
and right when he did,
the bull moved his head.
Fuck.
He's not dead,
but he's hurt.
All right, I told him.
Let me go down and get this mess cleaned up.
As they stayed there,
I made a big circle around
to the other side of the canyon
where typo was bedded.
It took me over an hour, maybe even two hours,
as I wasn't taking any chances with the wind
and went very wide.
When I was a couple hundred yards
from the three quakes,
which were my landmarks,
I slipped off my boots
and continued on slowly
and silently and just my socks.
As I neared where typo
should be,
I looked through my binoculars
over to Kit Mark Dan and Chris
and saw them motioning with their hands.
With hand signals from a mile away,
they were telling me
that the bull was going up the hill.
When I neared the quakes,
I spotted him slowly making his way up the hill.
He was stoved up,
but I needed to get another arrow
in him or risk losing him.
It was going to take a very long bow shot
to make that happen,
but I got a good range on him
and I knew exactly the distance.
I already had an arrow knock
so I quickly dialed in my sight
and drew back my bowstring.
Settling my pin on his ribs
as he quartered away,
he would take a couple extra steps
and stop, re-gather himself,
and take another couple extra steps.
I waited at full draw for him to stop.
By this time I was completely relaxed
and felt rock steady.
Pulling my bow hard against my back wall
of my draw,
I cheated the pin up a couple inches
on his body as he moved
a yard or two further up the hill
from when I had ranged him
and slowly squeezed the trigger of my release.
The arrow are tied,
covering the long distance
before dropping home,
sinking into his ribs
as it angled toward the bull's lungs.
This time my shot was perfect.
I hustled up the mountain as fast
as I could in my socks
knocking in arrows I went.
He hadn't gone far from where I had hit him
and those still on his feet
now his head was down.
He was quite a poke 92 yards
but I was in kill mode
as I came to full draw
and released again the second long bow shot
also hit him perfectly.
The bow went down
and after a few kicks
died quickly,
a wave of relief
washed over me.
And then you get to him
sitting beside the dead tight bull
was a bittersweet moment of relief.
My mind was conflicted.
I had succeeded in achieving my goal
but knowing I had ended the life
of a truly majestic animal
to do so brings a hint of melancholy.
There was also a solemn sense of pride
that comes with knowing once the bull hit the ground
the ending of his life
would help sustain me
and my family for months.
I took a moment to give reverence
for the life of the animal I killed.
Thanks for the nourishment beast.
Your flesh will fuel me
and your antlers on my wall
will ensure your life is honored
as long as I live.
Got it done.
And you know,
there you are
the next day
making a shot at 92 yards
another shot at whatever
90, probably 94
95 yards
both perfect shots.
Yeah, I think the first one
was the first one I think was actually
a hundred and seven.
And then the second one
I had snuck up a little bit
and he didn't go that far
and so he was 92 in the second
but the first one was
a little over a hundred.
Yeah, and to everybody knows
like most people want to shoot
no further than 50 yards.
Yeah, I would say.
And I think 40 is really what
most people feel very confident
in it.
Yeah.
50 is out
a little bit further, but
a hundred and seven.
That's a long shot.
It's a long shot.
Yeah.
I just wanted to get, you know,
in my head that animal had suffered
all night.
And so I wanted to
just do it.
I should have done the first time
and just close a deal.
It's an interesting parallel
with you, Jitsu.
I can Jitsu.
You go and train and you
you get tapped out by people
and you keep coming back.
And like if you never got tapped out
it's to me if I never got tapped out
I would probably not come back as often.
Right.
If bow hunting was easy,
it wouldn't be so rewarding.
Right.
It wouldn't be the draw.
Yeah.
And it's like if that to me,
that's the only thing
the only reason I've ever stood out
in life.
So it's like I feel
this is what I was supposed to be good at.
This is what I was supposed to do.
This is my thing.
So to fail,
it feels different with to me also.
Yeah.
While it's going to say that earlier
when you were like,
well, it's a lot of money
and there's a lot of pressure
from wanting to do the right thing.
And I was like, oh,
end your campaigns.
Yeah.
You know,
like this is,
you carry,
it's like when the Gracie family
is like, you did do.
Right.
They're carrying their family name.
Which is a,
which is kind of a rough thing.
Because that's hard.
When you're,
the Gracie family's huge.
And there might be some kid
that's 14 years old
that started training two years ago,
but he's part of the Gracie family.
Yeah.
So you have, you know,
that's your name.
Right.
Yeah.
So it's,
they,
when they,
they were watching from the
Ridge, you know, where we first saw the bull.
And so they said that me making those two shots
to kill it,
made out for,
so that,
if I'd already let everybody down on it
and like,
like,
it,
well,
that got me back to zero.
That got to level down to get.
Yeah.
Did anybody get video of it?
No.
No,
not from that far.
Nobody had anything.
Yeah.
We haven't never really had a camera crew there.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
The camera crew you were talking about
earlier like that.
That's another dynamic we're doing.
Yeah.
That's a dynamic we're doing this stuff.
Oh man.
That must really bother you.
Yeah.
I mean,
I,
I don't like having with anybody.
Yeah.
That's what I'm saying.
So even on these guided hunts,
and they,
they already,
they all know this,
but I don't,
I just want to do it.
You know,
I don't need help.
If I screw up,
I wanted to be me screwing up.
But so then,
then,
we have a camera man there.
You know,
there's always somebody to blame.
So the camera man,
it's like the worst job ever.
There's anything,
any of the steak,
it's like,
you know,
they saw the camera or they heard you.
Whatever.
But when it works out,
like I've had.
The camera slash blame guy.
Yeah. Exactly.
I've had some hunts that I'm so thankful we have for sure.
For sure.
You know,
but there's that.
It's kind of rough waters out for a while.
Yeah.
To get it done.
It is pretty,
I mean,
I have some good footage from last year.
Yeah.
The Dudley was with me.
Dudley was filming.
You know,
I'm probably the only person in the world that gets to have John Dudley as my freaky camera.
I remember he had already killed and he was like,
right?
And, you know,
he got a freaking good video of the,
you know,
the end of this.
I actually got the set up and everything.
Yeah.
And it's,
and I'm really happy.
And I will say that like,
like,
review and tape for anything.
Like any sport.
Yeah.
You know,
you can watch and be like,
yeah,
yeah.
No,
I know.
I remember I think your shot was it,
was it a little back at the lungs?
Yep.
Like we're at one Earth was liver.
It was like,
one long,
one long and liver.
Yeah.
I remember that.
So that's,
that is good to know because a lot of times it happens super fast.
Yep.
So being able to have that footage to review can actually help in the recovery.
Right before that,
I had shot another wolf in Colorado.
And that one,
I really would have liked to have that on video because I think you can help me with this.
So the bowl was at 51 yards.
Mm.
And I was on my knees.
And he was walking,
you know,
from right to left.
And
ordering away a little bit.
I don't know what's that called.
Like anything away or something.
Like this yeah.
It's slightly squirming.
Slightly squirming.
And so he's squirming away.
So I thought okay,
I'm going to aim a little bit back.
And then I was waiting for him to stop.
He stopped.
And so I,
you know,
started letting go.
My era went.
And it was like,
he took a step.
It was,
this is what happened.
He was looking at us.
So I was waiting for him to look away before I let the arrow go.
So he started to look away.
I started pulling back, let the arrow go.
But he wasn't just looking away.
He was taking a step.
Yeah.
So I hit him further back than I wanted to.
But in reviewing it in my head, I thought,
OK, so if I'm going to be aiming at a bull,
I should cheat a little bit in the direction
that he might take a step.
Or is that a bad call?
We would just go with the stationary.
Yeah, because you don't know for sure.
So you don't want to cheat, then they don't take a step.
And then you overthink it almost.
Yeah, it's hard to predict what they're going to do.
I mean, I did recover that bull.
But it took a while and it took some expert tracking to find.
Again, I was very lucky.
Yeah, I had Dudley with me in the guide up there helping out.
But man, they're tough.
I mean, he went down and up these three hills.
Yeah.
That were not fun.
He wrote a read.
They're not fun.
And he had an arrow freaking sticking in him.
Yeah.
It's a, yeah.
I think almost, I've seen, you know, I talked about my dad
or whatever, but I'm sure you guys know that that
will to live is pretty strong, even for humans.
We're not as tough as animals, but still, people can really
hold on.
And it's like, when that life is leaving, like it's so
an animal or I say anything, I've heard even people say,
oh, care, but it's easy.
They die easy.
And I'm like, I don't know anything.
It's a dice easy.
I don't know anything.
So especially something as tough as a bull elk.
It does this born and bred in the mountains.
It's just like they're will to live, just like any things,
anything that's alive, there's a will to live.
That is just incredible.
And they're freaking, like when you said born in the mountains,
you see them go up a hill.
Yeah.
It's insane.
No, they'll go up and over a ridge.
You'll try to do the same thing or take you an hour.
Yeah.
And they do it in minutes.
It's freaking crazy to watch.
Yeah.
They're there. But one thing that humans do have
over animals, almost any animal other than maybe a wolf,
is endurance.
So those bulls can put distance between you and them
quickly.
But if you can stay on, it's hard finding country
that would allow this.
But that's like an African that's what they do.
They stay on these animals.
And then they get it.
Animals get exhausted before the humans do.
So we have endurance, as that's
our pretty much our only advantage.
Yeah.
And I would caveat by saying some humans.
Maybe not everybody.
Maybe not the woke ones.
You got some crazy stories in here.
Here's a story with Roy in it.
Roy stared in the face and danger.
And the face of danger didn't blink.
This happened during Brown Bear hunt.
We had gone on earlier in July that year.
We'd had a big snow, a big sal brown bear that turned into
a problem.
She saw us from about 130 yards away and started running full
speed right at us.
Roy ready to his three, his dot three, five, seven.
Gonna get some.
That he'd brought as backup.
And I knocked an arrow.
Not sure what an arrow would do to a charging brown bear.
But that's all I had.
Does that say three, five, seven or three, seven, five?
It says three, seven, five.
Oh, three, seven, five.
No, that's right.
Yeah.
No, three, fifty, seven.
I was like, well, that would be a pistol.
I was like, I hope that is a three, five, seven.
Three, seven, five.
Five, five.
That's a magnet.
That's what he had.
That's a burn.
They're going to.
He's Roy said, if she gets to our side of the creek,
I'm going to have to shoot her.
She crossed the creek without hesitation and ran toward us.
At about 20 yards, she stopped and stood up aggressively,
huffing and staring us down, head rocking side to side.
We were standing in the wide open in knee high grass,
so there was no mistake in we were humans.
We were giving her a chance to make a better decision
since we didn't want to kill her unless we absolutely had to.
Get out of here, we hauled.
It didn't matter.
The brown bear dropped down.
And with deadly intentions and ears pinned back,
she charged.
Roy fired one shot and stone her at close range.
Me or feet from us.
I couldn't help uttering aloud and inappropriate
cuss word fuck.
I was mad that we had to kill another bear.
I had killed a nice bore already,
and we were on a high after that awesome success
and sweet footage of my perfect bow shot.
Now we had killed now we had had another killed,
which we didn't want.
Despite the fact that we were in grave danger,
that aspect never even entered our minds.
After I cost mad shaking my head,
Roy said matter of fact, dude, I had to.
I replied, I know, it just sucks.
A typical response might have been,
oh my God, we could have been killed.
Are you okay? I'm shaking.
But I knew I had a partner, but I knew the partner I had
in Roy.
He shared the same type of confidence I had.
He was never rattled and always in control.
I knew in 10 lifetimes,
I'd never find another partner like Roy.
Good times.
Yeah, that was a bummer.
She had these full grown cobs with her,
so they'll stick around sometimes.
They don't need to be with the south,
but they hang around for a while before they split off.
So she had those with her,
and I don't know what it was,
but I shot this bore,
and she had heard something.
I think maybe when the arrow hit,
and she had heard something, I think maybe when the arrow hit him,
he made a noise,
because she had her those full grown cobs,
and it was a bore,
boars will kill cobs.
And so she heard that noise didn't know what,
so she came over and then smelled blood from my bear.
Track that blood all the way out to where he died
and started tearing them up.
She was attacking them and hair and stuff as you want everywhere.
And I'm like, I go, dude, she's tearing up my bear.
And so we're yelling at her,
and I go, I said shoot out there,
not to shoot her,
but just shoot out there,
spooker, so he shoots nothing.
And she didn't pay attention.
Then she turned and looked and she saw us,
and we're about 130 yards away,
and she just came just sprinting.
And it's like a bear, a big brown bear,
I'd like to sprint into the grass at you,
it's just like,
you're knocking up at her,
yeah, I'm like,
I don't know what I'll do,
and so we didn't want to kill her at all.
And it was just like the biggest downer.
And even when I was in this video,
I think it's still on YouTube,
but I'm sitting there with a bull-eye kill
and Roy is in the background.
He's like looking, because those full-grown cubs,
they're still 400 pounds,
they're not really cubs, they're yearlings.
But they're back and forth,
and he's looking at him,
he's just shaking his head,
because it was just,
you know, they obviously were going to survive.
They're all going to survive,
but it was just a downer.
We're not trying to kill us out, you know?
And we end up a calling fishing game
on the satellite phone saying what happened,
which happens a lot up there.
It's called defensive life and property.
You can kill bear if your life's at risk.
And we had to skin it out and take it back in
and do the paperwork and do all that.
So we did all that,
but it's not that it was,
you know, legal or anything like that.
It was all legal, but it's just,
we just didn't want to have to kill another bear.
But, yeah, we were in those situations quite often,
which happens, you know?
They say, we have a greater chance of,
who knows what, getting struck by lightning,
they've been attacked by grizzly.
Not if you're hunting grizzly all the time.
If you're hunting grizzly all the time,
it's like 75% chance.
You're going to get attacked.
So we were used to it,
but it's still, you know, it's pretty intense.
Yeah, the bears,
their bears are psycho.
Is that a accurate statement?
Yeah, grizzlies have a different,
although that's a brown bear,
which is, you know, a grizzly too,
but so I killed another bear up there.
There's a limit, there's so many brown bears,
and non-risen can kill too.
But we had this bait set up,
which was legal this year,
that we were hunting is 2015.
And the black bear would come in,
and they would just be pretty docile,
not wound up at all, pretty relaxed.
Then a, like, the big bore that I killed,
the brown bear, not that I wanted to describe there,
but a different one.
It would come in, and it'd just be rocking back and forth,
just like, kind of like possessed.
And it looked like a dinosaur,
because it was nine foot six tall, you know,
it's just a, but on all four,
so it looked really tall and rocking.
And just like scanning all around,
and you're just like, oh my God, this thing isn't saying.
Yeah, they seem like psychos.
Yeah, yeah, they,
and they killed their babies, and they were so, so, so, so.
And they're freaking huge and so strong.
All right, I'm gonna fast forward a little bit.
I was in Colorado bow hunting with Kip,
and I was in the Fox and Mark Womack.
I spotted and stalked a big Colorado white tail.
I hustled toward the buck as quietly as possible.
He saw something a few times,
but I was staying pretty low, crawling mostly.
We figured he thought it was another buck.
So while I closed in on him,
he started coming my way.
He came pretty fast,
looking his lips,
and even stopped to make a scrap in the sage brush at 60 yards.
He started to skirt me a bit,
so I figured it was time,
the shop felt good,
I touched low,
and he was ordered to a tiny bit.
I felt it was good enough to kill him,
so Mark and I backed out,
planning to come back at first light to recover him.
That night before bed,
we reviewed the footage and concluded dead buck.
Look like the liver,
but you never know.
I climbed into my bed that night
with excitement and belief that we would find the buck in the morning.
Sleep wouldn't come.
However,
at 11 p.m.,
myself on ring,
I was always trace.
Roy's been in an accident,
she told me.
She didn't know all the details about what had happened,
so I knew I needed to call Jill Roy's wife.
I phoned her and asked what was going on.
After a long pause, Jill said,
Cam, Roy's not coming home.
Jill's voice sounded soft,
and tired.
I asked what do you mean?
She said,
he fell,
he passed away.
My stomach dropped,
and the darkness of the old farmhouse kitchen I stood in,
there in the middle of nowhere,
Colorado felt darker and lonely.
I couldn't believe her words.
Right away,
I found out their children,
Taylor and Justin and Ellen.
Roy had fallen 700 feet from a cliff
in the nasty country we hunted sheep in.
He was on Pioneer Peak,
the exact same mountain
where I had killed my ram in 2008,
and where Roy had killed ram since.
Now, in 2015,
the mountain had won.
In this chapter,
the book is called,
Legends Never Die.
Hmm.
Yeah, I have a hard time even thinking about this
still without getting choked up.
There's people that come in your life
that,
I don't know,
he's just one of those guys who I always believed in me.
And we had,
you know,
it's like a bond,
you go through hard things with people,
and I know it's,
and I can imagine it's like this with the military
where you have,
you just like a brotherhood,
you know,
because of what you've went through.
And that's how it was with,
with Roy and I in that,
in that regard.
So yeah.
I don't know.
We have a lot of,
a lot of big plans,
a lot of things were going good for us,
that we talked about and dreamed about
for our whole lives,
you know,
he's becoming an outfitter up there.
He's,
like a legend up there,
and people would talk about Roy,
and a,
and a lask.
It's hard to be legend,
a legend in a lask.
There's a lot of legendary people,
but he was earning that name,
and so yeah,
felt,
I don't know,
still feels,
I mean,
I'm still upset about it,
still mad,
because,
you know,
we had so much left to do.
Yeah.
I know a lot of times you'll,
you know,
you're talking about the military,
aspect of things,
and I mean,
I still post pictures of my friend,
that I've lost,
and I can tell by what you write that,
he still is pushing you,
even though he's not here,
and you know,
you can go a little bit further,
and you can be a little bit more Roy tough,
as,
as you put some of those things,
and that's the same thing I think about,
you know,
the same thing,
hey,
you know,
the same thing,
hey,
I mean,
I got guys that died,
when they were way too young,
way too young,
yeah,
and they don't have the opportunity
to carry on,
and the opportunity that,
to do the things that I get to do right now,
and even if that thing is just getting up in the morning,
and going for a workout,
like,
that's a gift,
you know,
hmm.
Well,
I wouldn't,
Roy started moving,
I mean,
I wouldn't be here.
It's like,
normally,
after I would do something like this,
I would call Roy,
and we,
you know,
this is,
this is all part of our thing,
or we did it.
And,
you know,
that's,
that's a reason why,
I mean,
I picked that picture on the cover of the book,
that's from our last hunt,
and it was a moose hunt,
two weeks before we died,
and,
you know,
I mean,
it's just,
you got to get by,
you got to,
you know,
if you want to,
they say it might be cliche,
but you know,
people die twice when they,
when they're life ends,
and then the last time somebody mentions their name.
And so,
just like you bring up the guys that,
you know,
that you've lost.
I'm always going to honor Roy.
I'm doing it right now.
This is what I'm doing.
I'm doing it in the book,
because without him,
I wouldn't be here,
and,
so,
I mean,
yeah,
it's just,
it's tough.
I mean,
I still,
I'm still in contact with Jill all the time,
and,
yeah,
just,
I don't know,
life changing.
Yeah.
And again,
you put so many cool stories and details about all that,
that,
this is another reason,
just to,
to get the book and learn some of those things,
and keep saying that name.
I want to close out,
you know,
obviously,
I'm not reading the whole book,
but I just want to close out with one,
one section here.
Towards the end of the book,
you say,
many years ago,
I decided I was going to work hard every day on being the very best bow hunter I could be.
Along with taking care of my family,
that is my purpose in life.
Everything I do is prioritized,
I've been as prioritized around this drive and this dream.
I started 5am and finish at APM every day.
I give it my best.
I have gratitude for the gifts and opportunities I'm given.
I enjoy the journey.
Steve Prefontane was right.
To give anything less than your best is to sacrifice the gift.
That's exactly how I look at it.
Bow hunting can be a struggle.
It's hard and very competitive.
It can be very cut throat.
But so can life.
Life can be tough and beat us down.
We experience loss.
I loved one or a family member or a job or a dream.
We battle our own demons and dependencies.
We all take hits and get beaten down.
That's when we have choices to make.
Only you can choose not to hesitate.
Only you can keep moving.
Only you can climb over snow and ice.
And tough footing and steep rugged country.
What dream do you hold that you're not going to let go of?
If I can do it, anyone can.
But you will have to earn it.
You will have to endure.
You will have to keep hammering.
So again, if you're listening to this, get the book.
Let's make this thing a freaking best seller.
Just to spite the people that don't want this book to be a best seller.
So many things.
And there's like I said, there's a bunch of things that I didn't cover here.
And as you've said about the book, it's, and it clearly isn't.
It's not just about bow hunting.
It's about life.
And it's going to do a ton of things to help people.
Get through whatever they're getting through and be on the right path in their lives.
Some of the things we didn't cover in this book, I just wanted to keep hammering.
So you, according to the book, you do talk about this, but Bob From, who's a San Diego kind of legend,
archery guy Hunter.
He runs performance archery here in San Diego.
And he used to call you cam the hammer.
Is that what that originated from?
Yeah.
You know Bob?
How he's charismatic and always just talk in is kind of cool.
So he would say, you know, call me and say, hey, what's up cam the hammer?
So just him.
He was kind of a legend to me too.
He was on a magazine called Western Bow Hunter.
And he's seemed like he was on the cover all the time.
And so he made Bow hunting cool.
So for, yeah, I was going to have a longer hair kind of good looking guys.
Pretty badass.
And then you got a section in there, Rogan talking about Rogan.
How do you meet Rogan originally?
I don't know. He sent out a tweet.
So I went to his podcast in 2014 and then I took him a bow.
And if you know, he almost like once he gets into something, it's all the way.
Right.
So then I said, well, let's go.
Let's do a hunt.
And a good first hunt is a bear hunt because it's usually closed.
And I could, you know, be there with them.
And I don't know if I agree with that for.
Well, it's just that the shot distance isn't less can go wrong.
Yeah.
It's adrenaline.
I don't know.
There's a really one major thing that can go wrong.
Yeah.
Well, that's yeah.
That's what the tracking and the wounding and all that.
But if you do things right, it can be pretty high percentage of chances success.
So I thought, let's go on a bear hunt.
And as funny, he killed a bear.
We got a picture of it.
And I remember we were up there and I'm like, I go, hey, I put up a post of the picture of you
and you're, and you're bear.
And he's like, yeah, no.
I've heard all about it already because it's like bear.
And then if you're like a celebrity type and then killing a bear,
it's like, I thought people think they're endangered.
You know, because no people think they're windy the pool.
Yeah.
I'm a little bit more endangered or both.
And so yeah, he was kind of, you know, that's where he really was driven home about hunting
and animals.
And there's a negative connotation with it.
Obviously, people who don't do it or don't understand it.
Anyway, so that was in 2014.
Yeah.
And you, that's another part of the book that we didn't really talk about.
You explained all that stuff.
You explained how hunting works and how conservation works and how animal management works.
And if you just let these animals go, like, there's some species that will get completely wiped out.
And that'll, off balance everything.
So all the stuff is so tightly controlled.
Yeah.
That it's actually what keeps the environment in balance.
Well, I saw this very popular.
He's like kind of an animal rights activist.
He's got millions of followers.
He posted this video of this leopard attacking a man in kind of like a city.
Right?
He said, you go, see, this is what happens when humans and crotch on animals animal habitat.
And that's what he said.
And I'm like, well, no shit.
That's what we do everywhere.
That's why animal numbers need to be managed because that's what cities are.
There used to be animals here.
Now there's a city.
So as a city grows, we're approaching.
So you can't have the same amount of animals that we're here 20 years ago.
If there's less habitat.
So that's where that whole balance and the biology and the carrying capacity of land come in.
But yeah, it's in hunting funds all that.
That's the key point with there's kind of a catch phrase hunting is conservation.
Which is because hunting pays for that habitat enhancement in the studies and the welfare of animals.
Yeah.
And Jill wrote the forward to this book, which is awesome.
Did a great job of that.
You know, like, I guess people sometimes, I guess they make a jealous of Jill Rogan.
Because he's got so much popularity.
But man, he's good at shit.
Like you were just saying, he's freaking good at archery.
Yeah.
People are like, are you not ready?
Why do you really know about fighting?
Dude, that guy fought.
That guy's a black belt in due jitsu.
And then they think that doing a podcast is easy.
Oh, man.
And doing the way he does a podcast is easy.
Talking to people off the top of his head for two, three, four, five hours.
Like crazy.
Oh, I listen to a lot of shitty podcasts.
That those people think podcast is easy.
But Joe does make it seem.
He does.
That's so, it's so hard to make a conversation interesting.
And, you know, the first time I went on there, I'm like, so do you have a,
we got questions or he's like, no.
No.
So he's like, I was like, oh, we're just going to, just going to bullshit.
Most of time, if guys just sit down just to bullshit, it's going to be awful.
Yeah.
And people think that other people want to hear you bullshit.
Well, if I want to do that, just go to a restaurant.
Sit in the booth next to you and listen.
You're talking about freaking going to get grocery shopping dinner.
Right.
Because I think that's the best.
Or usually it's about some kids tea ball coach who Tim, he should be playing more.
Starting, but it's just whatever.
How long was it between when you got him a bow and he went hunting for a bear?
I think.
I mean, a few months probably.
Right.
Yeah.
I can't remember when I went down there, but we went spring bear hunting.
So it was about this time of year in 2014, I believe.
Yeah.
I can't remember, but a few months, you know, he was confident in shooting.
You know, because he probably did it 20 hours a day because he's pretty obsessive.
And now we're actually kind of unified now in a way.
Because we got you, Joe, Kip, me, Pete Roberts with this new venture, or Jean Hunt,
making American-made hunting gear clothing.
That's a kind of big step for you going into founding a company and moving in that direction.
How's that feel?
Feels incredible.
I still feel like the small town guy making $4.72 an hour working part-time at a warehouse.
And now you say founding a company, it's just again.
This is all this journey.
And the whole point to all this, I think, in the book and everything else in my story,
is that just staying on the path, staying on the path, and over time,
who knows what's going to happen.
You couldn't have told me back when I was at Kid Getting Drunken Punch at Parties,
because I got a smart ass that, do you know someday you're going to be doing this?
I'd be like, you got to be talking about somebody else.
Because there's no way, so it seems surreal.
But you know, you make these relationships in these decisions, and you keep working and working
and working, and after 30-some years, like this journey has been, who knows what's going to happen.
And I was thinking about this yesterday as I ran on the beach.
I saw this kid down there fishing.
And I'm like, what if this kid, like, I couldn't imagine if I lived in the city,
I couldn't imagine if I lived here, what would I do?
What would I have stood out in anything? I don't know.
But I was one of one of that kid. He's down here fishing by himself.
And, you know, made the decision to come down on the Saturday morning and hey, let's see what I can do.
What if that's going to lead him, maybe he's going to be the most well-known fisherman in the world at some point?
But you can't tell from a glimpse and, you know, when you're young,
you don't know what your life's going to hold.
You don't know, you know, then you have kids and you want them to be special in their own right.
And this all is journey. That's all the book is about.
It's just like, you know, stay true to yourself, keep working hard, endure, and who knows?
Next in, you'll have your own line of hunting gear.
How exciting is that? I mean, you see that how fired up people are?
Oh, yeah. I mean, it's a maze.
I'm more excited about it. Because I've been saying, and as I've said every time I talk about this, there's no more patriotic group of people than hunters.
And hunters don't want to buy stuff that's not made in America.
Yeah. And they don't really have many options right now. And they're about to have options.
I mean, I think if anybody could be half as excited as Kip is, that'd be pretty damn good start.
He's like going through, he's always, you know, loves the videos of trying this stuff on and bending over and talking about the cuts.
And it's just like, in this guy has, I don't know how much money.
A lot of money from when under Armour and what public.
And he doesn't have to do this. So it's like, you know it's just passion.
And it's what he loves.
Yeah. And so how could you not be excited for that?
Yeah. And he doesn't have to do this. And originally he reached out to Pete.
Just because he saw what we were doing with origin. He saw that we were just making freaking
Gees, Getsu Gees in America and thought that was cool.
Yeah. And probably probably also thought, man, I better help these jackass out.
Because he's, I mean, he has grown up doing that.
Yeah. Literally from college on. And I mean, when he rattles off kind of the stats of like, you know, I open 38 factory.
You know, like, he's, I forget what the numbers are, but yeah, it's incredible.
I mean, think about how big of a company under Armour and it's right.
And he was, he was running that on the backside for all those years and built it.
So he's definitely been a huge help to Pete.
Pete Roberts is the other owner who he's like the manufacturer from our team, you know,
and he's done an incredible job of build something for the ground up as well.
And so this, we, so we kind of had the ingredients.
Well, I mean, we phrase that we had some of the ingredients, right?
We had, we had Pete who knew how to make stuff in America, right? That's part of the ingredients.
We knew I, I could get the word out about it. Kip has the, the actual experience to get it done and the design experience,
but, you know, we needed somebody that was legit that actually could say this is what we need.
This is how it needs to work and who else, you know, why not just why not just throw a freaking,
you know, a 200 yard archery shot out. See if we can bullseye, we've pulled it off.
Well, it's, I mean, it's an honor to be involved for sure because it's, it gives me so much pride just to know and we're doing something that
could make a difference. You know, it's like that's our whole point to life.
Is I, what are you doing? This going to make a positive difference.
And I feel like this is, you know, it's causing a ripple effect.
And, you know, bringing those videos. It's like, it's like, I saw one the other day,
Orgen put up and I think it was, is it dacks? Yep.
And talking about, you know, he feels like he's just a small part of the machine,
but, but talking about bringing American manufacturing back to America,
it's, it reminds me, I watched this old series called The Min Who Built America.
Have you watched it? I have watched a few of those.
So it reminds me of that. It's like that, that type of effort and that vision
starts there. Yeah. And it's, when I see those factories in the working and the,
and the workers and the people and the pride in it and the, and I, like,
people like Dax, it's like, I don't know, it gives you butterflies almost.
It's special. Yeah, it really is.
And it's, um, to Pete's credit.
Pupika told this was impossible five years ago.
There's no way we can manufacture geese in America.
He got told that. Like everyone kind of looked at him like he was kind of crazy.
And maybe they were right. Yeah.
Maybe Pete is a little bit crazy. Yeah.
But, you know, just like you did with our tree, he just kept at it and kept trying to figure out,
how do you overcome this obstacle? What do you do in this situation?
How do we get by that? And he built a great foundation and has great knowledge.
And then you throw someone like, kip into the mix, who's done all that and taking it to the next level.
Uh, because, you know, Pete's a humble guy. He's not sitting around thinking he has all the answers.
And so when you throw someone like kip into the mix, who does have,
he may not have all the answers.
He's got a lot of them done. You know, from the business side, from the manufacturing side,
from the design side, he's got like a incredible amount of experience.
So that's awesome. And then having you to give your guidance,
which is really what everything's based on.
It's like, what does this guy want to pre-mear bow hunters in the world?
What does this guy think this should be like?
Then let, then we have something special.
Yeah, it's, well, don't you think that that, like you mentioned Pete and being humble?
Don't you think that that's a key ingredient to like businesses like this is ego?
I see ego killing so many great opportunities.
So the fact that he's humble and like, and says he doesn't, he probably has a lot of the answers.
But just being open to hearing somebody else, it's so paramount to a successful business.
I, ego kills so much that could have been special.
Yeah.
I mean, obviously I have a leadership consulting company.
And when people always ask, well, what's that main problem that you see?
And it is, the main problem that we see is ego.
You know, I don't want to listen to your plan because I think my plan is better than yours.
And I don't even want to hear your plan because I think my plan is better than yours.
That's just all ego.
And to just be able to say, hey, you know what, can I think, let's try your idea.
That sounds like it's actually sounds like it's better than mine.
Let's go with that.
To have that open mindness is what brings on
success.
I mean, it's just like anything else.
But you know, if you're doing jigset, so when you're like, hey, I already know how to do an arm lock.
I guarantee you get all in the mat with Dean Lister or Jeff Glover.
They're going to be like, they're going to be able to teach you something about that arm lock that you did not know.
This is a move I've done a thousand times.
I've done it 10,000 times.
Maybe even a hundred thousand times.
But if Dean or Jeff or someone that's an expert goes, hey, you should have moved your
absolute little bit more over here.
You should have hold the risk like this.
You're going to learn every time with with with bow hunting.
You go, oh, well, how do you think we should do this?
What can I?
Well, even more important.
You know, when's the last time you said, you know what?
I'll be good.
My shots will hit.
I shoot enough.
I don't need to shoot today.
That's a lack of humility.
Yeah, never.
Never happened.
I'm up.
But I think it's I do want to say, I mean, having you say those nice things about me is like,
it seems surreal to me.
I think the key part is like you say you have this consulting business, but you actually, you live it.
It's not like you're just a lot.
I know a lot of people who teach who don't follow that same principle, right?
So I think that because origin has been set up with this approach about maybe your idea is better.
Maybe I need to listen to this.
Maybe, you know, whatever just being collaborative.
And it's, I mean, this is what happens.
This is the kind of excitement that's generated in the potential that's there with the right attitude and the key pieces in place.
But you know, you see it.
I see the key pieces in place and they don't work.
They don't work because that there's whatever I guess ego or there's who knows what.
Yeah.
Well, you, you, at the term I use you, you have to be able to subordinate your ego, which means you actually have to be able to say, you know what?
But Pete, but it will go with that.
That, let's go with that.
I'm, I'm good and not be like, well, actually, I want to do it my way.
Yeah.
And here's the thing, if my way is better, then I should be able to articulate that, right, in a way that you go, yeah, you know what that actually makes sense.
Yeah, that, yeah, I can't argue with that.
Cool.
Let's go forward.
And that's what you need to do.
Ideas shouldn't be driven by ego.
We're driven by what's the best idea, right?
That's how you make things work and that's how we're going to make the best freaking hunting game in the world.
Yeah.
And we're going to make it right here in America.
And we're going to bring back jobs and we need to teach people skills.
That's what's amazing.
Is we are, we have a whole group of people that now have a legitimate skill and they have a career.
Mm-hmm.
Some of the people that work for us, they, they already knew this, the skill, but now they're able to use it again, because they're not going to be able to use it again.
Cause a lot of the factories went overseas and now they're able to use it again.
Some of these younger folks, they're learning it right now.
I mean, we got a kid that knows how to make, you know, how to weave material.
It's, it was a lost art.
And he grabbed it from, from the last guy that really knew how to do it.
Lenny who actually died, but that skills been captured now.
And now you got somebody that's going to, that has a freaking awesome skill and
contribute into the world and contributing to the economy and contributing to the community and contributing to America.
Like, how awesome is that?
Yeah, it's incredible.
All right.
Um,
your family.
Just real quick.
I just want to give props to your wife.
Cread it.
I feel like, uh, sometimes my wife, you know, my wife and my wife married me or met me when I was an E4.
And the Navy.
Mm-hmm.
I always tell her she married me for my money.
I think I was making like $22,000 a year or something like that when she met me.
Yeah.
No pre-not.
She didn't want half of that.
She was a bit of a law for yet, obviously.
So props to her and then, uh, true it.
I met your son, true it a few times.
Um, seems like a stud.
Yeah.
I know he broke up.
I broke up.
Goggen's pull up record.
He did.
Yeah.
Has Goggen's come back on that yet?
He hasn't.
No.
It's a tough one because it even took Goggen's three times to get it.
Yeah.
You know, so it's like your body.
You might want to do it.
It doesn't mean your body's going to hold up.
Yeah.
That's a tough one with those little, you know, your, your grip and your forearm.
Small muscle.
And your, and your hands just get trash.
Yeah.
Which one?
People ask that about seal training.
Like, it's all mental.
I'm like, well.
No, not really.
Because no matter how bad you want to be able to do that rope climb, and I always use rope climb.
Because rope climb, yeah.
Rob climb is there's no gutting through a rope climb.
Right.
Like you can gut through.
You can, you can gut through much more of a rock sack, march.
Hmm.
Like part of that.
Oh, cuckoo.
You can have, you can have like a heat stroke and fall out.
Yeah.
But a lot of that is just like gut through it.
You can gut through boats on your head.
Right.
Like you put the boats on your head during how weak.
That's just a gut check.
There's no, if you, if you are a 19 year old American male,
you can, you can withstand it.
You can perform the physical activity of boats on your head.
Right.
Running around.
Uh, but a rope climb.
Yeah.
Your mind will not get you to the top of that free to rope.
And your body will.
So you, you're out there like, oh, it's a mental game.
Yeah.
Cool.
Climb that rope.
I really want to climb that rope.
Yeah.
But if you can't do it, all the mental strength in the world
isn't going to get you up that rope.
And then not.
Isn't true.
Got lucky.
That has body cooperated that day.
That one day he chose.
So this is like.
Yeah.
Anyway, but he did it.
What is it?
4,241,141 hundred.
Yeah.
God can said, then 4,032.
But he was supportive of the whole.
Yeah.
He was good.
You know, he met true.
So he was good with it.
It's always whenever you see somebody pushing harder.
Yeah.
People say in Jiu-Jitsu, I'm going to get you one day to me.
I'm like, I hope so.
Yeah.
And Jiu-Jitsu works.
If you work hard, that's what happens.
Yeah.
Really.
Not going to be mad at someone because they freaking, I'm actually going to be stoked.
Yeah.
I'm going to go train harder.
Train more.
That's the way it works.
And then your other son is in the army.
Yes.
A ranger.
Mm-hmm.
Rangers.
What's the connection?
While he was going through, they figured out who he was that you were his dad, or
some of him, he wanted to be like low pro.
Yeah.
Just like Clinton.
Don't stand out for any reason.
Don't get any extra attention.
Don't know what he needs to know when your birthday is.
Obviously, the worst thing in the military is it seems like.
Cause people knew you're birthday.
So, yeah.
And then you got one more daughter in high school.
Yeah.
I'm glad you're doing this year, just senior.
Right on.
Awesome.
Uh, echo.
Yes.
You got any questions?
Yeah.
Do you actually, how much does it,
are you ready to be a bow hunter?
Yeah.
Oh, actually, which is my way of it.
Let me ask you a sweet.
Did I, did I go too hard in the paint on bow hunting as hard?
Because it's hard.
It, no, no.
Okay.
But it's challenging, but it's rewarding.
Did that, it seems accurate from my position.
It catches very limited, by the way, because we all know.
So that reminds me of a quick question.
So you know how like, let's say a guy that I know has a crossbow.
Our bow hunters and crossbows, or crossbow guys, kind of add odds a little bit.
Crossbow isn't bond.
So yes, then.
So if I said hypothetically, that I have a crossbow, would you be kind of mad at me?
Would you be like, what would I be like one notch lower?
Yes.
Okay.
I understand.
That was a high point.
Okay.
And how much does an arrow weigh?
Or is it, do they vary?
Yeah.
My arrow weighs 540 grains.
Oh, so there's a girl, okay?
Yeah, just like bullet.
Yeah.
And then the tips you can, you know what?
Yeah, those can be from 100 grains or even smaller to up to 200 grains.
And then you have what like the different like broadhead arrow?
Yeah.
What is that like the three blades, right?
They're like blades on the same broadhead.
Yeah.
And then what other kind do you use?
Or is that even a thing?
Well, there's a field tip that you practice with, so it has no blades.
And then there's an expandable broadhead, which means that flies with the blades sucked in.
And then what it hits something, the blades come out.
They expand out to cut a bigger hole.
And then there's a fixed blade broadhead, which is what I shoot where the blades are just
out the whole time.
And is that like what's just the typical ones?
Or is there like a bat?
You know how like in bullets?
Yeah.
There's all kinds of broadheads.
A lot of people are a lot of normally people don't use expandables for elk.
Some people do.
And they work.
I've, for one reason, and Oregon, fixed blade broadheads are the only thing that we're
legal until like a year or two ago.
So that's all I've ever used.
And expandables can cause problems if they hit heavy bone.
Like that tight bowl of story with an expandable, I wouldn't have got that bowl.
That my arrow wouldn't have went in 13 inches.
I wouldn't have been out to get another element at the next day.
So it'll loss that bowl with an expandable.
And expandables also can hit, if you hit like a, maybe like a twig, which is already like
you, you already got problems if you hit a twig.
Or something else.
But it can open those things up maybe early and now like you can have more problems
too.
Yeah.
But the expandable kind of big hole.
Open a big hole like big.
So just feel tip expandable and then fix blade.
So is there like exotic?
Okay.
So let's say I know what you're saying.
He's wants to know if there's like a, the twig's on the other side.
There's design your broadheads or whatever.
And go like that.
Rambo.
That's what I was going to say.
Like you got the explosive.
You got to say all these other ones I would ever.
Like, there is it like that with arrows or what?
You know, there hasn't been an explosive.
I've done some.
There has to be no.
I did.
There's a guy Richard Ryan and he used to, he might have been an original investor or I
don't, I came in anyway.
He is part of Black Rifle for a while.
And he, we did some trick filming with, with, with the, archery and, and Bo shots and
different things.
I got shot.
I shot cheese off a mouse trap that he was holding.
And so we're trying to see if I can get the cheese off of it before the mouse trap got
my arrow.
So he held it and I shot it.
But another one he did was we put propane flame that shot up and then a paint can
behind it.
So the arrow would go through the, propane flame, pull the flame and then puncture
the paint can then it explode.
And it's like a huge explosion.
So I made a joke that was like, I shouldn't a rambo brought him.
But there hasn't been a rambo brought head yet like in, I think is Rambo 2.
One of the greatest films of all time.
Yes, sir.
Yes.
But there has been one where they're shooting is like a 357 shell casing or shell on the
end of an arrow.
And it would like, I think they killed some hogs with it.
Like it hit the hog and then fire the primer.
Yeah.
I've never used one.
But that's the closest we got to Rambo.
I could see where.
All right.
Since I know echo pretty well, I can see he's got all kinds of like he wants to have
a selection of the party.
Designer, yeah, broadheads.
But that's different ones, yes, sir.
So there's no twisty one.
You know, like I figured that would be a thing.
The broadheads I use actually the blades come off at an angle.
And I think it enhances, because when an arrow flies for to be accurate, there has to
be helical on it.
Just like rifling on a barrel.
So that's what it gives that direction.
This is like a so a muzzle loader if it's just a ball isn't very accurate.
But that twist.
So same thing with the narrowest and principle.
The flesh on the back of the arrow is what gives direction to that arrow.
Well, my broadheads come off at an angle.
And I think it enhances.
So when it hits an animal, it's twisting as it cuts.
And I think it cuts a more devastating womb channel because it's going like that.
So it cuts a hole instead of just slices.
You're going to get some things for your crossbow growth.
I'm going to look deeper into this stuff.
Right on.
I like it.
Cam, any closing thoughts and things we missed?
Like I said, it's an honor to be here.
I mean, I don't feel worthy of sitting with you guys, honestly.
This is, I never thought I'd be here.
I never thought I'd be here talking to you guys or larger than life for me and for a lot
of others.
We actually had this training at work not long ago.
And the trainer mentioned this Navy Seal, Jocco.
And he's like, and I was just like, I know Jocco.
So yeah, this seems, you know, I used to reel earlier, but it does.
It feels, I don't know.
I'm honored to be here.
I'm honored that you looked at my book and you actually gave me advice when I was
just like in a publisher.
You guys use the same publishers, me?
Same publisher, same marons.
And so you gave me some great advice there and you've been a resource and now we're partners.
And it doesn't feel like my life.
But thank you.
Well, right, all man, as I mentioned earlier, I feel the same way.
Like here, I am talking with the freaking world, world class dude and it's just awesome.
So thanks for coming on.
Thanks for sharing your lessons learned.
And thanks for your encouragement to me and so many other people.
Like there's so many other people.
I know that you inspire so many people to get on the path of bow hunting, but not just
get on the path of bow hunting, just to get on a better path in their life.
And I think this book is going to do that even more.
And as you said, it's an honor to be working with you, partner with you, and to take, you
know, what this thing is, you know, talk to Kip, talk to Pete, I can feel it.
There's like a rocket.
It's like a rocket.
You can watch the fuse.
It's burned in right now.
The temperatures come in. We're testing product. Like we're ready to watch this thing go
Richter.
So thanks for what you do.
And thanks for inspiring people all over the world.
Thank you.
Take care.
Thank you guys.
I appreciate it.
Right on.
And with that, Cameron Haynes has left the building.
Echo Charles.
Are you ready to become a bow hunter?
I think so.
Yeah.
I was trying to think of Crossbow hunting versus bow hunting.
And I was trying to think of what a good example would be.
I kind of landed on surfing versus body boarding.
That makes sense to me.
Thank you, man.
No disrespect to body boarding.
But something along those lines a little bit where let's face it.
Let's face it.
More skill to surf than body board fundamentally.
Sure.
No, again, no disrespect to the spongers at the highest level.
How they're getting after it.
The fact is I don't know.
But it seems that that's the case.
So even like, yeah, okay.
So I know guy with a crossbow.
And he let me shoot it from time to time.
And I have shot a bow before.
When did you shoot a bow?
Actually, the last time I did was about a week ago.
Where?
At Greg Train's house.
Oh, that's right.
Greg Train's on that.
Yeah, his arms were a little short of my hands.
So it was like, but then I shot one at the origin camp.
One of the guys.
No one.
Yeah.
And I dig it.
I'm with it, man.
I made a bullseye to by the way, but it's neither here nor there.
Just naturally skilled like that.
So why do you buy a crossbow?
The guy who has had the crossbow from before.
Either way, yes, the bow seemed or has a lot more going on.
For sure.
So I can dig how you'd say that.
It's not.
I was gonna think a ghee versus no ghee, but it's not that.
Because no ghee, they're both.
They're both highly respected.
Yes.
Really respected.
And difficult.
And there's a lot to both of them.
Regardless of perception.
That's okay.
I found it.
I think I found it.
Skate boarding versus scooters.
Like the two wheelers.
So that's what you're crossbow is.
You're on a razor scooter taking up a room in the half pipe.
Yeah.
That's what's going on.
Did I make?
And I asked you this during the podcast, but it's so hard.
But hunting is so hard.
I hope I didn't discourage anyone from trying it and doing it.
But you got to recognize there's a lot going on, man.
This is not an easy game to play.
Oh, yeah.
That's freaking hard.
Oh, it's real hard.
Actually, even that opening that you opened with, it made me physically feel probably
a good element of how hard it is because I remember back, you know, like when I'm thinking,
okay, the first time I ever shot a bow, I'm like, okay, this is like, dude, I got to pay attention
to all this stuff.
And then I got to aim in a certain way and all this stuff.
And then that's just my, and there's not to mention like the 1000 things that I don't
know about.
And then you want to mix that with actually going out and doing it with any animal.
Any animal.
It's, it's crazy.
And then you got to learn about all these different animals because they all act different
by the way, like a bear does this, you know, elk does that and a deer does something else.
Like they all have different reactions.
They all have different senses.
So, and then you got to like I said, then once you shoot that animal, then you got to
go find that thing.
If you got a shot that was good enough to make the animal bleed.
So the thing is, yes, extremely challenging.
Other side of that spectrum, it's an awesome reward.
Awesome reward.
You asked, do I want to be a bow hunter now?
Prunk kind of.
Right.
And here's the thing, like I think, and this is an actually, and this didn't start right
now though.
I think right, right one Cameron Hayne, even Judd, John Dead Dudley, when they kind of came
up, exploded onto the scene, bro, I felt it then.
No, it wasn't like I kind of dope.
And you know, you see other people doing it and then talk about it, kind of just kind of
exposes it in a way that, you know, I haven't been exposed to it.
And I'm sure a lot of other people seem to seem to deal because I noticed a lot of people
picked it up after that kind of started.
Yeah, for sure.
I'm wonderful.
Yeah, I feel it.
I feel it.
So yeah, I do.
All right, we're good.
Hey, uh, gonna need to get in good shape if you're gonna do any kind of hunting or if
you can do any kind of living, by the way, just being alive, I recommend you being
good shape.
Just like it pays to be in good shape when you're out of the mountain, maybe you could get
that one tenth of a percent that's going to make the difference.
What's that one tenth of a percent in life?
Let's think about that.
So that means staying physically active, healthy, working out, pushing yourself.
You know what that means?
Yes.
What does it mean?
It means a lot of things.
But, you know, so with my kids and you can kind of mention this before, right, where
with kids like they're watching you.
So sometimes they're gonna be like, oh, I see, you know, dad's doing this, so they might
want to try to imitate a little bit, just to see what the what the hype is all about, you
know?
And so my kids in my very specific situation, like they'll start jumping in on the
workouts or whatever, sort of making little goals and stuff like that.
And they have to endure things like domes or their domes.
That's basically what it is, right?
But when your kid, domes is like, you know what that is.
You just think it's like, your body's breaking down.
You're like, that's a big truth.
I got domes.
What up?
You know, not yet.
Until you explain it or whatever, but either way, you get sorness.
It's not all like freaking bulls eyes is what I'm saying.
True.
You know, you get some pain.
Get some aches.
Some good days and bad days.
It's what I'm saying.
Takes effort.
Well, when you start feeling some of those bad days, maybe you need some more protein,
right?
Get yourself some milk, get yourself some joint warfare, get yourself some super
curl, get yourself some jocquaffeeal, jocquaffeeal.com, make that happen out of the
gate.
Yep.
We got new flavors on the energy drinks that are coming.
All the flavors are new.
Right.
So again, you mentioned that before we started recording.
And it's the way you said, okay, took clarify, they're not new flavors.
The same flavors redefined or remastered.
Remastered.
Yeah.
And even you could just say, mastered.
Because here's the thing.
The initial flavor profiles.
Let's call them.
They were based on my sense of taste.
Which my sense of taste, you know, not eat a bunch of sweets.
All the sudden, I drink something with monk fruit in it.
I'm like, whoa.
I'm used to drinking water.
Right.
So you put a little monk fruit in something.
And I think I'm, I think I'm having a freaking, uh, a dang.
It's just a coker cola, right?
With a little tiny one-tenth to one percent of some monk fruit in there, I think I
got a coker cola.
I'm like, yeah, this tastes delicious.
This is so sweet.
I was wrong.
Yeah.
So we've adjusted so that they taste even better, kind of hit in the shelves.
Right now, depending on where you're at, depending on, yeah, it's depending on where you're
at.
But as you're hearing this, it's time to start getting back into the game.
If you didn't like the original flavors, we made them all, they taste, here's the thing,
we're going to win on taste now.
Before we were winning on this is good for you.
Everything else is poisonous.
It's actually going to kill you.
Yeah.
We were winning on that.
And winning on that.
But you also got a win on taste.
So now we're going to win on taste.
We're winning on all fronts.
So there you go.
DrFuel.com.
I will.
Coming your way.
Second, that being someone who has tasted the new flavor, I will agree with that.
Wait, flavor, or flavors.
Because I've tasted all new flavors in the wrong way.
Well, I just tasted the mango.
So, oh, no, no, the mango in the orange.
So, yeah.
They're freaking delicious.
You can get the drinks at Wawa.
You can get all the stuff at Vitamin Shop, or you can get all the chocolate filled.com.
Check some of that out.
And if you watch the video version of this on our YouTube channel, Doc Opawncast, you're
probably going to see camhaines ago.
What's camhaines look like?
And they're going to go, well, what's he wearing on his upper torso?
Sure.
You heard us talk about origin hunt.
So origin hunt is coming.
If you want to check into that, or if you're going to check in in whatever American
made just paragines, you want to check American made parabuts.
You want to check American made t-shirt.
American made bini.
American made wallet.
Belt.
Whatever.
If you want to bring manufacturing back to America, you want to support American
want to support freedom.
If you're anti-slave labor.
Go to origin usay.com and get yourself what you need.
Don't get tricked to you.
You can be anti uniquely priced labor.
What's the same deal?
What's the uniquely priced labor?
Is that what they call it?
Is that a euphemism for slave labor?
Yeah, yeah.
That's the what you call the euphemism.
The buzzword.
Yeah, the one that sounds good.
You know, that's a euphemism.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
This sounds good.
That's exactly what it is.
What is called slavery?
Yeah.
They in fact know how this is a freaking kid working for a dollar a week.
Oh yeah.
Cancer causing conditions.
Forced to.
By the way, forced to.
So this is America.
This is America.
We're not doing that.
We've got American made stuff supported.
It's George and USA.com.
This is America.
Yeah.
Blacks.
You kind of sounded like Pete right there when you said it like that.
Does Pete say it like that?
Yes.
Come on, I've been heard them say that.
Not to mention, you did this stuff as well on there.
Yeah.
American made.
That's basically it.
Oh yeah.
Yeah, we were doing, you know, when it would be called spring cleaning.
You know, I was observing.
But it was going on at my house and my wife brought out all the keys that I have to
kind of organize or whatever.
And yeah, I saw the comparison.
You know, they still have the keys.
Apparently, I didn't know.
Are they in the garbage now?
In the garage on the floor.
So you're heading to the garbage.
Yeah.
Exactly.
That's so happy.
I don't have any other keys anymore.
Yeah.
It's kind of worthless.
You know, no offense, but they're kind of worthless kind of.
It shows you how malleable the human mind is because we all just thought that's just
how it's going to be.
Just a just a wearing the most uncomfortable thing on your body while you're trying to
be athletic and moving around.
No reason for that.
OrgeneUSA.com.
That's true.
Also, if you want to represent while we're on this path, it's hard path.
That's one might say.
But hey, you want to represent go to jockelstore.com so you can get your apparel.
This one equals freedom.
It got some new discipline equals freedom.
Standard issue.
By the way, back to old school.
I don't want to do too much detail, but it's a basic design.
This one equals freedom.
And there's certain layers on there that you'll probably know this school.
Say, if you have a keen eye, you'll notice the layers done the last week.
Got some new stuff on there.
Anyway, if you want to represent, that's where you can get it.
Jockelstore.
There's also the shirt locker, which is your subscriptions shirts.
For every month, good design.
unique.
unique, creative fun.
In fact, this last one, I'm not going to tell you what it is.
Maybe I will.
But it was one of the, you know, every month, so all you'll get one, where people will
actually go out of their way to send you messages with them wearing the shirt.
Say, hey, you knocked it out of the park with this one.
I got that this past month.
Or this current month.
Where have I seen it yet?
Nope.
So it's not released yet.
This is not released.
Now everything's live.
So the first of the month, you, I don't care if you sign up on the first of the month,
or you, your order is on the first month.
It's that month.
It's all current.
So yeah, it's this month.
What does it make?
Yep.
That make sure we're just going to be very high esteemed.
Either way.
Yeah, Jockelstore.com.
Yeah, I need if you can subscribe to the shirt locker.
And you can subscribe to the podcast.
Legally.
Go out there.
Leave a review or whatever they say to do.
Yeah.
Jockelornerground.com.
We're doing a lot of Q&A on that.
We're also addressing some of the lives.
Some of the aspects of life that we can gain an edge on that maybe we're not thinking
about.
Yeah.
Right.
So that's probably a good thing to pay attention to.
The reason we have that is there's strange things going on in the world.
There's censorship.
People are getting banned, shadow banned for home on yards.
We don't have any control over the platform that you're listening to this on right now.
We do have control over Jockelornerground.com.
So if you want to help us out there, you can sign up for that.
It costs $8.18 a month.
If you can't afford that, we still want you in the game.
You can email assistance at Jockelornerground.com.
We have a YouTube channel.
You can see what Cameron Haynes is awesome looking sweatshirt.
He took it off after a walk.
Because it is one.
Yes.
Yeah.
So about halfway through.
Eric and he had to take it down.
Yeah, you don't want to let the aesthetic value diminish because of the functional value.
You seem to say it's not cold or if you're not enduring the elements, you might not need that.
So I'm going to put that on the side.
You're going to see.
So there you go.
Yeah, YouTube channel.
Check that out.
Psychological warfare.
I think I said we were going to make another one of those like three, four, five years ago.
That's some point in his job.
Yeah.
So it's on canvas.com to go to my American cool stuff.
Got a bunch of books.
They're the book to invest in right now and dirt by Cameron Haynes forward written by Joe
Rogan.
Freaking great book.
Lots of knowledge in there.
Like I said, it's not just about as not just about bow hunting.
Bohunting is the vehicle for lessons to be learned.
So check that out.
Only cry for the living by Holly McCay.
Here's a book.
We covered it on this podcast.
You might want to check into that book, the A-Raw account of war.
That Holly, who is a badass, risked life and limb to go and capture stories on the ground
in war.
So check that out.
Final spin.
Leadership strategy in tact is he got all the books I've written.
If you want them, go get them.
Ashill on front.
Just got back from Battlefield out of Gettysburg.
Power from next up in August is a little big horn.
We're going to go do the lessons.
Learn, walk the battlefield, add a little big horn.
So if you want to check that out, we have a muster coming up in Denver.
Anyways, if you want to come to an Ashill on front, go to Ashill on front.com.
Check out the events there.
Also if you need help in your organization.
We can give you leadership help.
That's what we do.
Also if you can't be online, look, you know how you got to go to the gym.
If you want to stay in shape, I do.
Leadership is the same way.
You're just going to go to the gym one time.
Now you're good.
Yeah, not to mention.
Actually, it might be the same thing, but not to mention where.
So I've been in this game for a while, been around you for a while.
And there is stuff within the last one month, actually more than one thing, by the way,
that hit me in a different way to make me realize it.
And it's stuff you've been saying in one way or another for the whole time years, by
the way.
And then you'll say it a certain way, or you'll interact with someone a certain way,
and be like, oh, that's what he meant.
Oh, that's how, you know, so you'll come across things that will be revelations over
time.
Yeah.
Extremeownership.com is about life.
It's about how to do better in life in a bunch of different ways.
So if you want to, by the way, if you got a question you want to ask me because going
there, I'll be alive on a zoom call.
And you can ask me whatever you want.
We'll work through it.
And if you want to help service members, active and retired, if you want to do good, you
want to provide some medical treatments for service members.
Go to America's MightyWorriers.org.
Also check out heroes and horses.org.
I've been making the mistake of calling it.com.org.org.
I was texting with Mike at the other day.
And he's like, you know, he's kind of like, he's kind of like, he goes,
he appreciates this important.
It's not work.
He's so sorry, Mike.
I'm sorry about that.
And hey, don't forget you can find Cameron Haynes.
He's on Instagram.
He's at Cameron Haynes.
And he puts up a lot of awesome stuff, puts up a lot of awesome stuff.
He does a lot of stories.
So if you want to check that out, give him a look.
As far as Echo and I go, we're both on Twitter.
I've been on Twitter.
Like, I've been back in the game on Twitter.
Kind of seems like it's moving in the right direction a little bit more.
It was kind of getting a little sketchy for a while.
So I've been hammered on Twitter a little bit.
Echoes there.
I'm there.
We're also on Instagram.
We're also on Facebook.
Echoes at EchoTrust.
I'm at Jocquan.
But once again, watch out.
The algorithm.
The free dopamine hits you're getting.
The dopamine without suffering.
It's bad for you.
Watch out for it.
Don't let it hit you.
And thanks.
Once again, campaigns are coming on.
So many lessons to learn.
And we appreciate it.
And it's an honor to be working with you now at Origin Hunt.
And of course, thanks to Military Personnel, Act of Duty, and Veterans that protect our
way of life around the world.
We are forever indebted to you.
And also thanks to our police law enforcement, firefighters, paramedics, EMTs, dispatchers,
correctional officers, board of patrol, secret service.
All the first responders.
You make incredible sacrifices to keep us safe here at home.
And we are grateful for what you do every day.
And to everyone else dispersed throughout camsbook, our buncha short sections.
And I didn't cover, I don't think I've covered very, I've covered a couple of them today.
Actually, no, I don't think I covered any of them.
But there are these short little sections that provide some insight into cams mindset
that I think will be helpful to anybody that's trying to get their mind right.
Here's one of those little sections.
It goes like this.
You make a good shot this season.
Nobody cares or a carger.
You miss this season.
You got a promotion at work.
Nobody cares or a carger.
Your dog died.
You won the Super Bowl.
Nobody cares.
Work harder.
Nobody really cares about your goals.
Nobody cares about your excuses for not achieving recent success.
Yesterday means nothing.
Recent failure.
Give all you have today.
What you've accomplished in the past means nothing.
We don't rest on laurels.
It is time to work.
And until next time, Zekko and Joko out.